CHAPTER I

ORIENTATION

	I am thankful to the University of Madras and the Director of
the Dr S. Radhakrishnan Institute for Advanced Study in Philosophy
for conferring on me the privilege and honour of delivering this
course of Special Lectures on the Viśişţādvaita system of philosophy,
as a part of its new and significant scheme of Special Lectures. I am
aware of my limitations and the difficulties of doing adequate justice
to my great theme within the limits set for my exposition. But still
hoping for inspiration from my subject-matter and encouraged by the
generous confidence reposed in me, I propose to address myself to
my task in all humility and devotion, and face the responsibilities
with the competence that, I hope, may be vouchsafed to me in this
worthy endeavour. A broad enunciation of the spirit and orienta-
tion of a school of philosophy invariably aids the comprehension of the
doctrinal details and may even exonerate the insufficiency of their
presentation. With that hypothesis in mind, I proceed to indicate
the major directions of thought characteristic of Visisttadvaita.
	(1) As is well known, the back-bone of a system of philosophical
thought is its epistemological frame-work. Viśiąţādvaita formulates
some basic epistemological principles. The first of its principles,
which has almost supplied its historical designation, is its concept
of knowledge. Knowledge for this school consists fundamentally in
characterising reality with predicates or qualitative determinations.
There is no knowing of reality without knowing it as characterised by
some feature or determinate adjective. It is neither a mute and
indeterminate awareness of the real nor a manipulation of ideal
predicates without referring them to the real as its determinate
identification. The subject-predicate situation is fundamental. Whe-
ther the real in its ultimate nature can fall outside this scheme will
engage us in the sequel. It is enough to note this initial insistence at
this stage.
	A second equally fundamental proposition of the system concerns
its understanding of the relation between knowledge and its object
or between thought and reality. This school advances the thesis
that thought, in its natural and unimpeded exercise, is in fundamental
harmony or attunement with reality. Unless this principle is conceded,
the consequence of nihilism cannot be, it is maintained, averted.
Rapport with Being is the intrinsic nature of knowing. May be there
are external hindrances to the maintenance of this fidelity, but after
the elimination of the hindrances, thought by itself, by a natural law
of its being, without any alien pressure or labour, achieves its natural
state of being truthful. It goes without saying that this is the prin-
ciple of svataḥ-pramāņya advanced by all schools of Mīmāmsā and
Vedānta.
	The consequences deduced from this principle are manifold in
Viŝisțādvaita. In the first place, Viŝisțādvaita discountenances the
possibility of sheer error, a total cognitive mistake, for such a contin-
	There
gency would signify the annihilation of cognition as such.
must be a substratum of truth in all error. What of the erroneous
superstructure built on this substratum, the so-called error of commis-
sion? This school does not admit the existence of this superstructure.
It contends that all error is of the nature of omission, of inadequate
apprehension. Only the fragmentariness of the truth apprehended is
the sting in error. If the element of omission is precisely and fully
discerned, there is no need to postulate an additional element of
commission in error. The factors causing cognitive failures are
obstructive in nature and not generative. There can be no manu-
facturing of mis-apprehension. There is only an illegitimate restriction
of apprehension. This is an innovation in Indian epistemology, but
is explained as following legitimately from the ascription of the nisus
or elan towards truth in knowing its own intrinsic nature. Further,
if a generative power is conceded to an alien factor over and above
the obstructive power, the principle that what generates knowledge
generates its truth also gets abandoned. There can be no knowing
divorced from the knowing of truth, and this whole power of
knowing truth belongs inherently to the mind or thought in its
purity.
	The consequence of this innovation leads to the conception of
truth and error in Visistadvaita and the whole edifice of knowledge
as conceived on this basis.
	As we have noted, there is no such thing as a sheer error. What-
ever error there is, is just a partial truth only, and its character of
being only a fragment of truth is not recognised. It is maintained, there-
fore, that there is nothing in error other than truth and the truth that
goes to make error is just a fraction of truth in the context not discer-
ned to be only a fraction. This fragmentary truth is made known by
the contradictions it engenders and the truth gets completed in the
process of overcoming contradictions.
	The entire edifice of knowledge is conceived as a process of com-
prehension, ascending stage by stage into widening ranges of
apprehension. From the so-called error we ascend to perception of
an authentic kind. There is no prejudice against sense-perception
in this school, and even the highest metaphysical revelation cannot
cancel or abolish sense-knowledge. There is no avidyā or adhyāsa
vitiating the realm of sense-experience at the very root. In percep-
tion there is indeterminate perception, when we sense a datum afresh
and the scope or generality of its characters is not yet grasped. But
when the pervasive features linking several particulars into a genus
or class are grasped as such and the particular datum is noted as
characterized by them, we have determinate perception. Error is
superseded in range in indeterminate perception, which in its turn is
taken up and duly supplemented and enlarged by determinate perce-
ption. From perception the ascent is to inference. Inference is no
doubt rooted in perception, but it goes beyond the sensed-particulars
and gives rise to understanding extending beyond them from the point
of space, time and generalities. There is no anti-intellectualism in
Rāmānuja's philosophy. In its sphere of operation, anumānı or tarka
is perfectly valid. It consists in grasping the consequents on
the basis of assured grounds. The schools like the Gārvāka
which endeavour to refute the validity of reasoning as such
adopt it most inconsistently in their very refutations and admit it in
their prescriptions for life.  There is no going against reasoning alto-
gether. But there are truths beyond both perception and inference,
and they have to be ascended to through revelation. Revelation is of
value in so far as it does not run into contradiction with perception
and reasoning, and is also not just a reiteration of what is cognized
well enough in them. There is no dogmatism or superstition involved
herein. This is a genuine source of knowledge, as it fulfils the criteria
of novelty and non-contradiction, and all other sources of knowledge
are also admitted precisely on those grounds. The principle of
svataḥ-prāmāņya is of universal application. Within the body of
revelation answers should be sought for questions which percep-
tionand inference are incompetent to answer conclusively.
It is a sound logical progress to increase our data when the data
at hand leave fundamental and inescapable questions unanswered.
Problems that pertain to creation as a whole, the nature of the soul
and the conception of an absolute reality are such that they should
be illumined, if at all, by revelation. Revelation itself should be
construed through a strict logic of interpretation, standardized by the
great tradition of Vedic exegesis. Within the body of propositions
advanced by revelation, a strict principle of comprehension must be
followed. No major direction of thought such as that of Divine
transcendence, or that of Divine immanence, should be sacrificed.
A total view of the import must be acquired through the procedure
of seeing in every special proclamation a supplementation and ampli-
fication of other such special teachings. Such a unified insight into
revelation is the culmination of the knowing process. It should not
be ignored that this insight is itself a completion and fulfilment of the
pre-revelation phase of knowledge and not its sublation in any sense.
This comprehension of revelation, high as it is, is not the final stage
of knowledge.This is intellectual understanding and no immediate
vision. It is the latter that is named para-vidyā. This carries the
scriptural wisdom to a greater height and amplifies it immeasurably
by richness of experience not accessible to mere intellection. At the
climax of this vision the seeker of knowledge realizes that there are
further ranges and heights of truth not yet encompassed by his vision.
and it is this discovery that is enshrined in the dictum 'neti, nëti'. It is
this that makes the spiritual venture an everlasting process holding
forth prospects of wonders beyond wonders.
	Thus the concept of knowledge is that of an ascending process of
perpetual enlargement and amplification, which cancels no lower
rung and terminates in no summit however exalted.
	(2) While the foregoing account of the orientation of the system
pertains to its theory of knowledge, it has an equally distinctive
and outstanding standpoint in metaphysics. Viewing the history of
metaphysics as a whole, one is struck by the significant alternative con-
ceptions that have sprung up again and again. There is the meta-
physics of materialism or naturalism for which the world open to
sense-knowledge and the rational systematisation of it by way of
science, is the only reality. This tendency of thought eliminates the
transcendent. There is an antagonistic temper and formulation for
which the empirical reality is a set of spurious appearances and behind
and beyond which lies the only reality at once transcendent and be-
yond the categories of experience and related ratiocination.
	It may
be posited as accessible to mystical intuition or dialectical demons-
	The identification of this wholly transcendent
tration or both.
self in man or pure being as such as the basis of the beings of empiri-
cal experience does not reduce the transcendence of the reality in
question. The beings of the empirical order and the empirical ego
are parts of the nullified realm of appearance, and what lies beyond
in sheer metaphysical transcendence is the real reality. This is the
antithesis of the first standpoint.
	It is not difficult to find numerous
illustrations of the two metaphysical trends in philosophy both Eastern
and Western. A third view has also actualized itself in the course of
human speculation which does not drastically annul either the trans-
cendent or the empirical but synthesizes the two by affirming the
substantative reality of the transcendent and assimilating to it by way
of ontological subordination the empirical order of existence. This is
what has been named 'the Idealism of comprehension', and it has
been exemplified by all the higher forms of philosophical theism. It is
neither wholly cosmic nor wholly acosmic, but combines in an inte-
grated perspective the concept of a transcendent Reality containing
within its infinite expanse all that constitutes our cosmos of experi-
ence, in the status of an adjectival part. It is this direction of meta-
physical thinking that is embodied in a full-fledged form in the
philosophy of Rāmānuja. An adequate articulation of this system
will bring out this philosophical identity clearly. Brahman is the one
central transcendent reality and the world of <i>cit</i> and <i>acit</i> belongs to it
in an adjectival capacity. Hence this school has acquired the name,
of 'Viśişţādavita'.
	The orientation is not complete without a brief account of
the literary history of the philosophical movement.
	As could be fairly expected, the writers in Visistadvaita confi-
dently claim that the ancient Vedic literature itself lays the founda-
tion for this school. The celebrated Puruşa-sūkta pictures the supreme
reality as an infinite personality permeating and transcending the
cosmos and as such, contemplation on it is said to be the road to
immortality. The most sacred prayer in Vedas glorifies the creator,
as adorably resplendent, and that He is to be contemplated upon and
prayed to, for saving illumination. Neither a poly-theistic Nature-
worship nor an acosmic monism is the creed of the Vedas.
The Nature-gods are just manifestations of a single divine principle, and
the world is named māyā on account of its wondrous panorama.
Rituals are not the last word of the Vedic religion, but the spiritual
realization of the ultimate. It is also significant that Visnu is duly
recognized as the infinite, all-pervading and all-subsuming God-head
whom all else, including the multiplicity of deities are just limited
manifestations.' Thus the Vedic wisdom projects in considerable
clarity the philosophy under consideration. All that is required is to
see through the veiled and indirect presentation in Vedic hymns.
Hence the justification for Vedanta.
	We pass from the early Vedic mysticism to open philosophical
proclamations in the <i>Upanişads</i>. All the <i>Upanişads</i> announce the unity
of the transcendent Brahman and predicate of it the infinite variety
of the cosmos. The smaller <i>Upanisads</i> such as <i>Isa</i>, <i>Prasna</i>, <i>Mundaka</i>,
Kena and Katha are comparatively easy of comprehension and speak
of an absolute sustaining and shining through the universe.
The major and philosophically weighty ones, such as the Taittiriya,
Chāndogva and Brhadāraņyaka, consolidate the philosophic position in
their elaborate dialogues. The 'blissful embodied spirit' (sarīra......
ānanda-maya-ātman) of the Taittirīya is a clear statement of what
Rāmānuja elaborated in his Vedānta. The Dahara-vidyā of the
Chāndogya is really central to the Upanişad assimilating into itself
the Sadvidyā and Bhīma-vidyā, and that section, on all accounts,
propounds a Brahman in Viśiștādvaitic terms. That the conception
of Brahman as the soul of which the world of finite selves and
material nature constitutes the body is not something that Rāmānuja
superimposes on the Vedinta, but something that he derives from it
through textual compulsiveness is demonstrated in the focal Antar-
yāmi-brāhmaņa of the Brhadāranyaka, out of which no Upanişadic
commentator can disengage himself by cogent exegesis.
	The early Vedic and Upanişadic thought is emphatic that man's
ultimate good lies in the apprehension of God, but it leaves much to
be clarified about the nature of this apprehension.
	The Gitā adds
the grand elucidation that this approach to the ultimate Deity must
be construed as <i>bhakti</i>, adoring contemplation or meditation of the
character of love. This is in consonance with the conception of the
Supreme in the Gitā as Puruşottama, the supreme Spirit, transcending
and also sustaining the realm of finite reality. The entire message
of the Gitā consists of these twin concepts of Puruşottama and bhakti,
and the magnificent structure of spiritual wisdom it builds up works
out the dimensions of these two. The teaching of the Gita is fully
incorporated in Rāmīnuja's philosophy, and that philosophy is, in
reality, developed in the course of the interpretation of the text.
Almost every other significant principle of the Gitā gets subsumed
organically under this leading philosophy of the Gitā furnishing the
inspiration and authority for Viśişţādvaita.
	The third textual basis for Viśistādvaita is the Brahma-sūtra and it
offers very little resistance to a Viśişţādvaitic commentator and
Rāmānuja appropriates it masterfully in building up his philosophi-
cal standpoint. Well may Madhusūdana Sarasvatī deplore the recal-
citrant character of the work in relation to Advaita and equally
intelligible is Vedanta Desika's declaration that all the four chapters
of the work expound Viśişţādvaita and the alien interpreter must
seek support from the fifth chapter. It may also be recalled that
Sridharasvāmi and Madhusūdana Sarasvatī gently deviate from
Sankara's interpretation of the final teaching of the Gitā (as contai-
ned in the 66th verse of the 18th chapter).
	The epic Mahābhārata contains in its vast canvas plenty of phi-
losophical material scattered throughout, and Rāmānuja finds in it
substantial basis for his philosophical position. He uses particularly
its Nārāyaņīya section in his defence of Pāñcarātra. Its Vaisņavism
and the gospel of surrender enter vitally into Viśişţādvaita.
	The other itihāsa, Vālmiki's Rāmāyaņa is a favourite classic. An
ardent Višisţādvaitin lives habitually in the world of Rāmīyaņa.
Though it is epic poetry, as Sudarsana Sūri says, it is looked upon as
the highest philosophy attired in the mode of poetry, kāvyatva kañ-
chukita-paramārtha.<sup>1</sup> The particular conception of prapatti domi-
nating the Visistadvaitic theory of sādhana is disclosed in all its ful-
ness in the episode of Vibhişana resorting for refuge to Sri Rāma.
The poetic style of the epic has entered into the writings of the mas-
ters of the tradition and contributes a unique charm of style.
	Among the Purāņas, the Vişņupurāņa hailed as purāņa-ratna by
Yāmunācārya, receives from Rāmānuja considerable elucidation and
some of the characteristic doctrines and technical terms are drawn
from this source. This is a brief purāna, has suffered least interpola-
tion, concerns itself more with philosophical ideas than stories, and
has been used as an authority by a wide range of philosophical wri-
ters including Sankara and Vyasa, the commentator on the Yoga-
sūtra, not to mention Vācaspati Miśra and Prakāśātman.
	The principal Smṛtis such as that of Manu, Apastamba, Yājña-
valkya and others command the respect of the tradition, and Rāmā-
nuja argues in favour of their value in the field of metaphysics and
theology also, in addition to their special province of dharma. In fact
in some crucial contexts they are used effectively.
	Now we have to consider the role of the Pāñcarātra-āgama in the
shaping of Viśişţādvaita. There is some debate concerning this
class of Sanskrit scripture. Sankara and Bhaskara regard it as only
partially in conformity with the Vedas and impute to it non-Vedic
doctrines also. Yāmunācārya, and following him Rāmānuja, refute
this allegation wholly and consider the Pañcaratra as a divine con-
densation of the Vedic philosophy. The practical and religious part
of Misintādvaita philosophy is greatly, influenced, by the Baffranatra
Its doctrine of God as manifesting Himself in five forms, and the five-
fold prescription of devotion are adopted in entirety saint aftion.
So much for a rough sketch of the Sankkrit literary inheritander<br>So much for a rough sketch of the Sankkrit literary inheritander<br>of Visistadvaita.
tou Visistādvaita as systematized by Rāmānuja has another source
of inspiration. The hymns of the Tamil saints, named Alvans, collect
tively named Divya-prabandha, constitute the other literary foundation
of the system. All these saints preceded Ramanuja and were
highly, venerated by thim. Their fervent compositions breathian
ëkaltëd spirit of devotions and are also markëd by a strong
current of philosophical consciousness. The term Alvar means
one who has merged himself in God-experience, and their lynical out
pourings, portray the varied spiritual moods such as yearning,
sweetness of devotion. Their stirring power is truly profound. The<br>
Ālvārs come from all castes not excluding the lowest in the conven-<br>
tional hierarchy and there is Apdal, a saintly profound.
excellence. These devotees draw their themes from the Vedas, the<br>Upanişaas, the Epics and Puranas and re-fill them with the depth
of authentic personal mysticism. Of these Nammalvar is esteemed
the loftiest, He is regarded as having transferred to the great Tamil
medium the divine wisdom of the Vedas. Tiruvaymoli is his most
celebrated composition which has evoked voluminous appreciative
exposition. In such works, it is claimed, the Alvars have solved many
a problem not solved even by the Sanskrit Vedantic literature.
Tradition holds that Nammalvar's great work enshrines, the sublime
pathway of surrender to God, a characteristic promulgation of this
school. The conjoined devotion to the Sanskrit, Vedanta and the
Vedenta distilled in this Tamil devotional literature, has earned for
the tradition the title of <i>Ubhaya Vedanta</i>, they will be written with
Utilizing this rich inheritance, the system-builders of Visiatau-
vaita, consistently described as Acaryas, proceeded to work out the
philosophy in all its completeness and detail. From their hands
Visistadvaita which was till then a spiritual tradition, emerged as a
fully formed dars ana, the distinctive feature of which is the intellectual
treatment of the inherited revelation and devotional inspira-
tion. The logical ordering of ideas, their intellectual defence and
advocacy in the manner of philosophical argument were the tasks to
which the Acaryas devoted themselves. The first of these Acaryas was
Näthamuni. He fulfilled two missions in his great life. He collec-
ted the Tamil prabandham with great effort and zeal. He consolidated
it and made its perpetuation a possibility. He laid the foundations for
the philosophy of Vaśişțādvaita in his two Sanskrit treatises, Nyāya-
tattva and Yoga-rahasya. Unfortunately both these works are lost and
only some significant fragments from them are preserved as quoted
in the works of the subsequent Acaryas. But his influence on the
system is profound and pervasive. The homage that Yāmunācārya
pays him is something phenomenal.
	The next great Ācārya is Yāmuna. Luckily some of his works
are available wholly, while some are incompletely available and one
is wholly lost. He is a vigorous dialectician and commands a synop-
tic vision of the system in the setting of the entire philosophical
heritage of India upto his time.  His devotional composition is of the
highest order, setting the model for subsequent poets. The remark-
able thing about his writings is that though their state of preservation
is unsatisfactory, they seem to be wholly incorporated in substance
and sometimes in the very terminology in the writings of Rāmānuja.
Rāmānuja's veneration for his personality and works is profound.
	The next great Ācārya is Rāmānuja traditionally regarded as
born in the year 1017 A. D. and as living a long and rich life of
dedication and philosophical creativity. Whetever be his reverence
to the previous Ācāryas, he is the greatest Ācārya in Visişţādvaita.
It is in the fitness of things that one of his great preceptors desired
that the system itself be named 'Rāmānuja-darsana' hence-forward.
His early career is marked by unceasing study and mastery of the
ancient heritage and current systems of philosophy. He did gather
with zeal the teachings of the earlier teachers of the tradi-
	His spirit was marked by an independence of judgment.
tion.
and an uncritical submission to authority was not possible for
	He not merely departed from the prevalent philosophical
him.
opinions but deviated from some of the elder preceptors of
	The sense of personal responsibility for
the tradition also.
	His vast scholarship and critical
truth burnt brightly in him.
originality were harnessed to a deep spirit of bhakti. That was the
very core of his personality. It was but natural for him to pray for
bhakti in the great invocatory verse of his greatest work. Bhakti was
the standard and criterion of all his philosophical valuations and the
motivation of his entire life and thought. Parasara Bhatta' says
that the master annihilated the dark powers of Kali with the single
talisman of bhakti. Vedānta Deśika describes the illumination radiat-
ing from him as fed by the inexhaustible oil of bhakti.' Dāśarathi, a
great disciple, says of him that he was a lion of bhakti, and that those
who live under his shelter could thereby encompass all in spiritual life,
even as the insects sticking to a lion are carried from peak to peak as
the lion leaps across the mountains.<sup>2</sup> There is certainly an occult link
between <i>bhakti</i> and compassion.<sup>8</sup> It is in profound conformity with
this that the great Nanjeer makes the oft-repeated pronouncement
that the test of a true man of God is that at the sight of suffering he
does not see the justice of it in terms of karma but gets moved into
intense sympathy and rushes to works of immediate relief.
	This is
exemplified in the historic acts of compassion on the part of Rāmā-
nuja fondly narrated in the biographies. Piļļai Lokācārya<sup>4</sup> records
that the age of large-heartedness in Viśişţādvaita was inaugurated by
Rāmānuja. Kureša than whom there was no greater disciple of
Rāmānuja says of his master that he had three points of greatness.
He was intoxicated with love for his Acyuta. In consequence, he took
all other values as utter trivialities. He was an ocean of compassion.
	The writings of Rāmānuja comprise only nine works.
	Of
these four are short devotional compositions. But the devotion in
them is such that they contain the quintessence of his philosophical
position. The Gitā has elicited from him a balanced, perceptive and
adequate commentary in a style befitting the original. That it moves
profoundly the devotees of the Gida's but natural. The Upanipuds
are endtidated in 'the' matther of survey and synopsis in the Vedarita-
WhgYdili, Which was his first presentation of his standpoint by way of
lan exposhion Gi Updat adic philosophy. ""'There is aiready the stature
Writhallty adıd Gomplereiless' un the Statement of The Vedanta sara
19 brief oeliicidariddrof the <sup>10</sup>BrahmalJutra, illenne the il Vedanta-dipa
also il wommentary on the sura covers a bigger scope making
clear the marketical frame work in felation to the parda paksa's and
šlååhahla Hedch section. "FHE Bri bhas ya is the fullest commentary
p
	Bathe art inhjörtand Brahma-samal in This is the greatest work of the
Achsa. The fisurlic marted in et in system of philosophy, combining
In itself an Interpretation or all the relevant passages of the Upanisads
288d'a' &dmbrete eludidaion or the aphorisms of the text. Rival phno-
sollhical views als examined in thoroughnes and the positive doctrines
are deelst ers formulated 'and 'presented in dreams' or perspec
thie the Phene is hothing provisional and precedent in argument oil The
digrey impalaso completentss' and finally to the entire vers interval
1838 37 VIIIf Havaita?92 Ven this Philosophismy contains butbulseidt
the rappurous of the attribut I There is no bifurcation, of black
oini baraa" in the "dramps bre Ramaninja, oand the fusion of the pak
intense sympathy and rushes to works of immaliates average of This
exemplified in the historic acts of compassion on the part of Rama-
qi, jroitasivorgina en avade Ignieinylı esajudana da calqua adikcords
eh þeworkgandiiseremarkable føri maturisn beharar teristir. self-passessi-
n stirre sy issay can a standarden berwasama don wolk simul twistip k not
discourse developing intolcoherent dynamic patterns event from the
theiclimaxafipgrandadonalusionals the order of his exposition.
isotzes graatesto weiten in athe staditionis. Wedenta Desikav himselfia
favourite of the Deity of learning, says that his style acquired grace
Phrough a devolit apprication to the iwritings of Ranianaja. 2017 Con-
reppiarelandy, yrandear lireomanulaton anala deep spirituar reposter
the arrange of the style arrange is a resident to the selfs are a style and the selfs
brasyzingstichmbarene dramidarisidarsaila sarl says indirinenjess.
essee by back, there's so eshaggir that that work as reventous ber
the supreme Divinity even as the parnava and the sanctum sancto-
rum at Srīrangam are. 2 Rāmanuja's inspiration led to a phenome-
hal growth of literature. Kureja, who masualmost a collaborator
with his Acarya, has left five felicitous devotional compositions, which
give wh insightful summany of the system and illustrate the path of per-
sonal devotion and surrender through the poet's own overt practice
of the same." His illustrious son, Parasara Bhatta, has followed him
in his great Ranga-rāja-stava and Srīguņa-ratna-koša. He has also left
a masterly commentary on Vişnu-sahasranāma. Many other works, of
his are lost. The stotra-tradition reached its consummation in Vedan-
ta Desika who has left hundreds of compositions in this genus; at once
movingly poetical and profoundly philosophical. The stotra-literature
redaptures successfully the substance of the Prabandham-literature in
fusion with the spiritual literature in Sanskrit The Probandham
literature itself was taken upon for interpretation by a series of distin-
guished writers and the bulk of it is immense. Its outstanding wai-
ters are Pillan, Nanjiyar, Periya Vācān Pillai and Vadakku Tiru-
vidhi Pillai. It is of absorbing interest and has almost equalled
the Vedantic literature in Sanskrit. Sudarsana Sūri, a great grand-
son of Kuresa, has produced a brilliant commentary on the Sri-bhast
ya which has eclipsed all others. This is the celebrated Sruta-prakāsi-
kā. This is an unsurpassed masterpiece in the literature of inter-
pretation. He has written an equally weighty commentary on the<br>Jadil nru m.<br>Ved in the sangraha. Vedanta Desika has commented on the Gita bhasya
of Rāmānuja in a similar fashion and with the same qualitative excel-
lence.
	On the esoteric teaching of Viśişţādvaita centering round
what are called the 'three secrets' (<i>rahasya-traya</i>) defining and elabora-
ting <i>prapatti</i>, a similar growth of first-rate literature has taken place,
the greatest names in the field being Pillai Lokācārya and Vedānta
Deśika. Varavaramuni is a splendid interpreter of Piļļai Lokācārya.
	Vedanta Desika requires special appreciation. He was specially
favoured by providence with stupendous powers, philosophical,
poetical and devotional, and fired with his spiritual passion, he has
produced a vast body of literature, interpretative and original, in
Sanskrit, Prakıt and Tamil. He has commented on all the principal
writings of Rāmānuja. He has written works elucidating the mysti-
cism of the Alvars. His Rahasya-traya-sāra is a majestic explanation of
the three secrets of Srivaisnavism. Almost every species of literature has
a towering work of his, propagating the message of Rāmānuja. His
contribution to stotra-literature is huge and astonishing in depth and
beauty. On the model of Nyaya-Vaiseşika writers, he has three
outstanding treatises, Nyāyaparišuddhi, Nyāya-siddhāñjana and Taitva-
mukta-kalāpa, with his own commentary on it, expounding the princi-
ples of Visisțādvaita in a rigorous technical style. He was a master
of dialectics and has Satadūşanī, in refutation of Advaita and a
Tamil work critically reviewing other schools of thought, Paramata-
bhañga. His manysidedness and height of achievement are stagge-
ring. There is a host of secondary writers too numerous to mention.
Perhaps, we must mention, in this connection Ranga Rāmānuja.
who commented on the works of Sudarsana Sūri and Vedānta Desika
and also produced commentaries on the principal Upanisads in re-
gular order and also a Sanskrit elucidation of Tiruvāymoļi. Mahācār-
ya was a dialectician of high order who continued the tradition of
Vedanta Desika. Govinda Raja wrote a famous commentary on the
Rāmāyaņa, Virarāghava on the Bhāgavatam and Viṣņu Citta on
Vișnupurăna. The series is continuing to our own times, and we
have a number of recent important works.
	Such is the map of the literary material constituting the basis.
exposition, and development of the rich tradition of the Visistadvaita
of Rāmānuja. Its intellectual substance and gospel of human libe-
ration are our chief concern in what follows.

CHAPTER II

CRITICAL REVIEW OF OTHER SCHOOLS BY RAMANUJA

	Rāmānuja's philosophical thought takes shape through a critical
review of the current philosophical systems. The Srī-bhāşya in its
second chapter subjects these systems to a considerable examination
and some additional points of criticism come up elsewhere also in the
	Though a complete statement of this critical
works of Rāmānuja.
part is out of the question, the basic arguments may be noticed for
purposes of a due recognition of the distinctive tenets of Rāmānuja.
	(1) It is curious that Rāmānuja does not state the refutation of
the Cārvāka system anywhere in his writings, though Yāmunācārya
and Vedanta Desika perform that critical work. One explanation is
that Rāmānuja takes the Pūrva-mīmāmsā of Jaimini as forming an
integral preparation to Vedanta and in the treatise of Jaimini, the
criticism of Cārvāka is implied in the very beginning. That criticism
along with the allied Nyaya criticism, which, in this part is in funda-
mental kinship with Mimämsä, is presupposed and fully admitted in
Viśisțādvaita with characteristic minor variations. The Cārvāka
epistemology extolling perception as the sole <i>pramāņa</i> condemns itself
at its very root by employing inferential polemics for demolishing
inference as a valid source of knowledge. Testimony, sacred or
otherwise, cannot be expunged.
	Pratyakşa has to
	support
itself on the principle of svatah-prāmānya and it is that principle
that validates testimony. A world-view, not acknowledging any
source of knowledge other than sense-perception of particulars,
indulges in spurious ratiocination in legislating for the totality of the
cosmos.
In metaphysics the assertion of matter, however conceived, as the
sole reality does run counter to self-consciousness, which is the
primary revelation of the self, not amenable to perception but the
indispensable foundation of all perception. That the self, so self-
revealing, should be looked upoil as an effect or Arolluct of matter
iyself is the cardinal prescription of the Garvaka. But this line of
thought is ruled out by the impossibility, as Vedanta Desika points
out,<sup>1</sup> of proving and explaining the principle of causation within the
strict limits of empiricism.
	Rāmānuja, in the course of his interpre-
tation of the second and thirteenth chapters of the Gitā advances all
the basic arguments for the super-physical reality of the Atman.
ethics, but founds the ethics on a sophisticated system of naturalistic
metaphysics. That there is no transcendent reality and no abiding
as causal power and the consequent doctrine of extreme temporalism,
	The ethics of
insisting on the literal 'momentariness' of all existence.
liberation is founded on a theory of causation which is supposed to
bring into being aggregates of the momentary units of existence.
Such aggregation is the source of suffering, and the wheel of dharma
is promulgated for bringing about the disintegration of the wretched
aggregates. Rāmānuja, like all other Vedāntins, attacks the central
doctrine: of 'momentariness', in , terms metaphysical and epistemolo-
gical and exhibits in detail the impossibility of the valued, causal
process out of 'momentary' elements, Gausation without continuity
is a creature of wishful fancy. Nor is the process of cognition intelli-
gible unless the object retains self-identity running through its pre-
cognitive and cognitive phases of actuality. To save the situation,
the Sautrantika Buddhists postulated the inferential reconstruction of
the object even in perception. The expedient does not work, because,
like causation and perception, perhaps much more so, inference
implies the continuity of at least the inferring consciousness for its
leap from the ground to the consequent. A perishing particular can
have no causal efficacy, can be no datum of perception and can
	sustain no inferential process. By a strange but predictable nemesis
Buddhism which started by denying the Atman concluded in Yogācāra
or Vijñānavāda with the denial of the entire world of external objects
and asserted the sole reality of the flux of consciousness making up
the self in Buddhism. Such a cosmic dream-consciousness has to be
proved in the face of the realistic deliverance of cognitive conscious-
ness, and the Yogācāra proofs are vitiated by its own basic thesis of
the non-objectivity of all thought. Pure subjectivism cannot be
proved by any <i>pramāņa</i>, for the <i>pramāņa</i> is also infected with the all-
embracing subjectivity. Further, the momentariness of the units of
the stream of consciousness involves all the difficulties of momentari-
ness in general raised in criticism of the earlier stand of Buddhism.
	The logical, if not the chronological, culmination of Buddhist
metaphysics is šūnya-vāda, the doctrine of the 'void'. The meaning of
the concept of śūnya is much debated, whether it signifies the ineffa-
ble and transcendent absolute or literal and total non-being. Rāmā-
nuja frames an objection that applies to both interpretations. He
advances his thesis that it must ultimately stand for being, for even
negation is a special form of affirmation. There is no non-being as
such. Distinctions and variations are spoken of negatively in ordinary
discourse and they too are determinate characterizations of existence.
The śūnya-vādin has the difficulty of proving his śūnya and only what
exists by way of knowledge can constitute a proof. The 'void'
stands in curtailed absoluteness if the <i>pramāņas</i> enjoy the required
	If they do not, the <i>śūnya</i> becomes an empty postu-
status of being.
late and all else reclaims reality inexorably. If sūnya is to be known
in mystic intuition, it will be on a par with the Vedantic Brahman,
and the explanation of the negative characterizations of Brahman in
the Upanişads bears an altogether different significance, as we shall
see later on.
	(3) On the Jaina system of philosophy, Rāmānuja's reactions
are simpler. The crude statement of syūd-vūda involves a violation
of the law of contradiction. A logical refinement would rob of it of
all speciality. Reality is, no doubt, complex and admits of a plurality
of predications but care must be taken to confine each predication
to its own sphere of application, in which case, there is nothing
startling or revolutionary in the logical theory of Jainism. In the
final philosophical position of Jainism, there is no recognition of a
central and unifying principle and to that extent the integrative
purpose of syād-vāda stands defeated. Jainism does well to recognize
the eternal reality of spirits or jivas and also that of nature, the ajiva.
But a dualism, such as that, cannot give a satisfactory view of the
cosmic order. An integrating ontological kernel is surely a metaphy-
sical necessity.
	There is a considerably materialistic element in the
Jaina account of the soul's transmigration and embodiment.
	For
these reasons, the view stands in need of correction and revision.
	It
errs in rejecting the teachings of Vedantic revelation affirming a trans-
cendent and infinite divine reality, which error lies at the root of all
other shortcomings. Rāmānuja habitually extends the scope of the
criticism of Jaina logic to the <i>bhedābheda</i> version of Vedānta, just as
he sees many basic affinities between later Buddhistic schools and
Advaita Vedānta.
	(4) The Sankhya is a hoary tradition in Indian philosophy.
According to Rāmānuja, it has some good points such
	as
	the
acceptance of Vedic authority to some extent, the doctrine of
satkārya-vāda, the interpretation of cosmic evolution as proceeding
from a single material principle, praketi, the doctrine of the irredu-
cibly non-physical character of the puruşa, the individual self.
	But
its cardinal blunders are three. (1) It attempts to explain the cosmic
process as self-contained and as needing no transcendent ground.
Matter, if it were sheer matter, can exercise no activity involving
self-transmutation from the status of a cause to that of an effect, as
	(2) The selves are conceived as inactive and
posited in this school.
uninvolved and as immutable to a fault. Such an entity can hardly
be a spiritual principle amenable to philosophical proof. (3) The
Sānkhya disables itself in rejecting the basic principle of Brahman or
Ĩśvara.
	The next major system that Rāmānuja reviews is the Vaise-
	(5)
şika. Its atomism is the first target of attack. That a unit of physical
existence, material enough to build up the world, could be indivisible
and be an ultimate unit is objectionable. Having all other properties
of matter in its gross form, how could the unit escape being spacial
and divisible needing a further group of components to build it up?
If it is regarded distinctive enough and is conceived as devoid of the
properties of gross matter, it could not be the material cause of the
latter on acccount of discontinuity in nature. The theory of causa-
tion propounded in Vaiseşika called asat-kārya-vāda has its own pro-
	The cause must continue to function in the effect, if the
blems.
theory abandons Buddhism, as it does. In that case the continuity
means merely that the effect is an actualization of what was merely
potential and implicit in the cause. A totally novel effect would rule
out necessary and universal connection between cause and effect.
Causal necessity implies that the effect is an unfoldment of the pro-
perties of the cause itself under new and appropriate conditions.
Causation is not a miracle, but a working out of the nature of things.
The so-called emergence of the new is a revelation or liberation of a
hitherto hidden or suppressed aspect of the causal material. The
Vaiseşika sets up a plurality of substances (dravya) and enumerates
features that belong to them such as guna, karma, sāmānya and višeşa
and posits a special category called samavāya to explain the relation of
the features to the substances.  This category for its connection with
substances on the one hand and with the features on the other would
need another supporting samavāya. There would be no end to sama-
vāyas. It would be better to hold that the features are intrinsically
embedded in the substances and no connecting principle need be
postulated. On the whole, Vaiśeşika posits categories beyond strict
logical necessity. The category of Atman is admitted in the system
but its nature is poorly conceived as lacking consciousness as its
essential nature. The position is hardly an improvement on materi-
alism. There is a theistic element in the school and it attempts to
prove the existence of God on rationalistic grounds. But the attempt
is inconclusive, not because God does not exist, but because reason
confined to the reading of relations between finite entities cannot
establish a transcendent and infinite principle. The infinite is acces-
sible only to a special mode of proof not having the limitations of
	The God that the Vaiseşika argument could establish does
reason.
not rise to the requirements of sound theism, and hence the greatest
writers in the tradition, like Udayana, make a liberal import of
Vedanta.
	This brings us to a consideration of speculative theism,
	(6)
such as that of Yoga and some forms of Saivism which seem to have
	The theistic argument of Nyāya-
been current in Rāmānuja's time.
Vaisesika also may be added to these. The position of theism, as
such, propounded on grounds of reason is what is to be considered
as examined by Rāmānuja.<sup>1</sup> Rāmānuja's criticism of the causal
argument seeking to infer God's existence is two-fold.
	(i) The argument is inconclusive. Though it may be admitted
that causal intelligence determines the origin and evolution of the
cosmos, it is not certain that there should be only one such intelli-
gence. A plurality of co-operative powers is also a possibility.
	(ii) Even if such a single intelligence were to be admitted as
operative in the process, it cannot be proved to be infinite and all-
inclusive as the complete theistic case requires. A finite God is all
that can be so established, even if that much can be established.
	The situation requires a little more explanation. In his criticism
of the atheistic schools of thought such as Sankhya, Ramīnuja
opposes them on the ground that they cannot explain the cosmic
process without admitting a divine intelligence as its ground.
	Here,
in his attack on the rationalistic schools of theism, he holds that their
case for God is weak and does not meet the full reqirements of
theism. He seems to be fighting both the thesis and anti-thesis.
	The clarification, in principle, is this. Reason when it attempts
to explain the world without positing God breaks down.
	It breaks
down equally when it attempts to prove His reality on the resources
	Revelation is the only way for a sound theism. Its
of pure reason.
indispensability is established by the fact that reason can neither
	The meaning of the term
prove nor disprove God's existence.
'aprāpte' in the Mīmāmsaka dictum, 'Aprāptehi, šāstram arthavat,' is
that what is neither proved nor disproved by other pramāņas is the
sphere for the illumination from revelation. The incompetence of
reason on the question is demonstrated by the antinomy it cannot
overcome.<sup>2</sup>
	Something needs to be said on Rāmīnuja's reaction to
	(7)
Pūrva-mīmīmsā. He holds it as a necessary preparation to Vedānta.
He refers to Kumārila respectfully.<sup>1</sup> He adopts the Prābhākara
views on several issues. He fully incorporates the doctrine of svatah-
prāmāņya-vāda. He adopts the thesis that the Vedas are impersonal
and eternal documents. On some points he differs from the preva-
lent Mimāmsā conceptions.
	The Mimāmsā school does not seem to concede the pre-
	(i)
eminence of the <i>Upanisads</i> in the body of Vedic revelation.
	It seems to attach primary efficacy to karma in the matter
	(ii)
of effecting man's spiritual liberation.
	In the conception of the Atman and self-luminosity of
	(iii)
knowledge the two wings of the school do not seem to come up to
the Visistādavaita point of view.
	(iv) In the enunciation of the metaphysical categories, the con-
cept of causation and the enumeration and explanation of pramāņas,
the school shows considerable uncertainty and borrows freely from
other schools, particularly Nyāya-Vaiseşika.
	(v) The one point of the Mimāmsā theory that Rāmānuja dis-
cusses fairly fully' concerns the import of the Vedic revelation. In
spite of the fact that he subscribes to a large number of the canons of
Vedic exegesis set forth by the school, he chooses to differ radically on
this point. The Mimāmsā theorists seem to have held that the primary
import of revelation was the presentation of practical imperatives for
man to act upon and not the affirmation of the nature of reality.
Rāmānuja,<sup>2</sup> following all the other schools of Vedanta, puts up a
strong defence in favour of the metaphysical import of the Vedic
testimony. A great deal of the psychology of language and the
nature of motivation get discussed incidentally. The main concern
is to rescue the Upanişadic teaching about ultimate reality from the
insignificant role assigned to it in the prevalent Mimāmsā conception.
Rāmānuja uses Mīmāmsā, but does not submit to it. His principal
guide is Bādarāyaņa, the final authority in Vedānta.
	Before attempting an account of Rāmānuja's critical review
	(8)
of Advaita, it is desirable to have a clear idea of the encounter itself.
Advaita Vedanta is perhaps the greatest formulation of idealistic
monism in the history of human thought.  The Western parallels are
just approximations to its standard of philosophical quality and
do not reach its height of clarity, intellectual completeness and philo-
sophical vision. Philosophers such as Parmemides, Plotinus, Spinoza.
Hegel, Schopenhauer and Bradley are all valuable by the measure of
approximation they achieve. Rāmānuja is by far the first philosopher
of eminence and by all standards, one of the towering and far-reach-
ing Vedantic theists, to engage himself in the dialectics against
Advaita. The Western theists and personal idealists ranged against
absolutism or idealistic monism hardly possess a comparable stature.
Hence a study of Rāmānuja's dialectics against Advaita has the
value and excitement of a first rate philosophical enlightenment.
	The controversy in later ages of Indian thought degenerates into
a wilderness of minor subtleties and is apt to lose width of perspec-
tive and the fundamentals at issue. But Rāmānuja meets Advaita at
its source, as it were, and deals with only the creative and pioneering
masters of the tradition, such as Gaudapada, Mandana Miśra.
Sankara, Sureśvara, Padmapāda, Vācaspati Miśra, Prakāśātman
and Vimuktātman. Sudarsana Sūri and Vedānta Dešika know of
some later Advaitins of eminence also. So the altitude of controversy
is as high as could be wished for. As remarked by more than one
non-partisan scholar in the field, Rāmānuja excels in the presenta-
tion of the Advaitic case, from the point of view of accuracy, logical
substantiation, and completeness of the condensation of essentials.
One of them observes : "A test of the degree of fairness with which
he (Rāmānuja) accomplishes this task may be found in the fact that
one may easily find this presentation of the Advaita more persuasive
than Sankara's own un-systematic exposition."
	A review of Rāmānuja's full discussion of Advaita is surely out
of the question. All that can be compressed is just a rapid notice of
the leading lines of thought so as to facilitate the emergence of
Rāmānuja's own specific philosophic position into full view.
	The first and ultimate assertion of Advaita is the reality of
	Brahman is the fundamental and infinite ontolological
Brahman.
verity. The concept, it should be realized, revolutionizes the entire
philosophic scene. It is true that the <i>Upanişads</i> provisionally clothe
Brahman with theistic attributes, making it the creator, preserver
and refuge of the universe and as something that differs from indivi-
dual souls and the physical world. But this is a preamble to be set
aside eventually. The physical world is phenomenal and does not
have any substantial ontological status.  The jiva or individual self
is a hybrid entity, being one with Brahman in its essential nature but
appearing different from it owing to phenomenal encrustations
derived from the phenomenal world. So there are no three meta-
physical entities ultimately. It is so much of a unity that it should
not be invested with the differentiating character of personality or
individuality, and the distinction between substance and attribute in
its nature is also untenable. Hence it is described as 'nirguna', attri-
buteless, separating it sharply from the God of theism. The reality
of Brahman needs no proof, for it is one in substance with our cons-
ciousness which is the substratum of all; proving, and for that
matter negating it, is also an exercise of consciousness.
	This infinite
consciousness is describable as joy or bliss, for non-duality is the
essesence of bliss.
	Accounting for the appearance of the phenomenal world and the
individuality of the so-called individual self is certainly a problem.
Dismissal calls for the explanation of the presentation of what is
thus dismissed. The principle called māyā or avidyā or both is posited
as responsible for the concealment of the real and presentation of the
unreal.
	The final goal of life, the summum bonum, lies in the experiential
realization on the part of the individual of his non-difference from
Brahman. That is the termination of the illusion of human bondage.
	This unjustifiably brief summary of Advaita is, perhaps, enough
for purposes of following Rāmānuja's criticism. The criticism can
be conveniently focused on the cardinal concepts, Brahman and
mäyä.
	Before taking up a brief statement of Rāmānuja's criticism
it seems necessary to eliminate a prevalent misconception. It is often
said that Sankara's Absolute may satisfy reason, but does not meet
the requirements of the yearning of the human heart. Hence Rāmā-
nuja propounded a philosophy suited to the sentiments of the lowlands
of humanity and gave a God that could feed and nourish the soul of
the emotional aspirant. It may be that Sankara's Absolute does not
meet the demands of the yearning devotee. Even that concession is
of doubtful validity. It may also be that Rāmānuja's God brings
emotional fulfilment. But to say that Rāmīnuja's critical reaction
to Advaita was just inspired by this non-logical or non-intellectual
motivation is a piece of historical non-sense. His primary opposi-
tion was on the plane of reason, and if the religiously and emotionally
satisfying character of his thought was pointed out, he would have,
perhaps, argued, as he does in the samanvay ädhikarana of Srī-bhāsya that
it is the highest truth that could meet the demands of the human
heart. The soul of man filled with truth is truly filled. This mis-
reading of Rāmānuja's polemics should be set aside once for all.
There is the other equally fallacious characterization of Sankara's
Absolute as the intuitional highest and Rāmānuja's God as the logical
highest. Both Sankara and Rāmānuja are protagonists of both
intellect and intuition, and cheap categorizations of the two philoso-
phers and mystics in terms carrying an unspoken comparative esti-
mate should be avoided.
	Now to turn to Rāmānuja's examination of Sankara's position.
	Brahman is no doubt the ultimate metaphysical principle.
	То
regard it as attributeless or without adjectival determination is to
banish it from the realm of reality. No mode of knowing, perception,
reason or scripture can establish the reality of such an entity. Intui-
tional experience, if there be such a thing, should make it known as
something transcending the other ways of knowing. Such transcen-
dence itself is a differentiating feature. While all experience is appa-
rently of objects distinguished by respective characters, proving that
an object is not such requires the discernment of some authentic
features in it as the ground of the proof.  Further, what is miscons-
trued in mundane experience, can be the object of the correcting
apprehension, only if it discloses features cancelling the misconstruc-
tion. The core of perceptual experience, be it determinate or indeter
minate, must be a judgment about a point of reality in terms of some
characterization. The implication of reasoning is doubly so.
	It is
the attribution of a consequent character to an existent on the ante-
cedent basis of a character apprehended in it.  The Advaitin's view
that Brahman is beyond verbal expression tacitly admits the scope of
verbal testimony as constituted of the object as characterized.
Whether the <i>Upanişads</i> posit an attributeless Brahman will engage
us in the sequel.
	Therefore the concept of a 'nirvisesa' or 'nirguna' Brahman is
that of a non-entity.  Even the identification of Brahman with cons-
ciousness cannot save the situation. Consciousness itself is a highly
determinate factor. In the first place, it is revelatory of an object or
objects, and it is by virtue of this potency that it is claimed to be self-
revelatory. What is revelatory of all else, it is argued, must be self-
revelatory. The objective factor renders the revelatory consciousness
conditioned thereby. It is self-revelatory in the sense that it immedi-
ately manifests itself to the self in the act of manifesting the object
to it, not needing another revelatory process and is thus conditioned
by the self. The self to which both the object and the revelatory
consciousness present themselves is itself a self-affirming reality, not
needing any other mediation or consciousness to be aware of itself.
The self is a personality aware of itself, and aware of the objective
realm, through an awareness that is self-manifesting to it. Thus
identity with consciousness, if it is a fact, would render Brahman
richly determinate and rule out, at the very root, the supposition of its
indeterminate and attributeless being. The merely material object is
poor in quality, lacking as it does awareness; cognitive consciousness
is richer, for it renders its object and itself cognizable to the self and
the self is qualitatively richest in the context as it knows itself, knows
the cognitive consciousness directly and knows also the object of the
latter through its mediation.
	The postulate of māyā involves two points. In the first place,
the world of physical reality, change and multiplicity of objects and
also the observed plurality of individual selves are held unreal.
Secondly, the factor of māyā or avidyā is held accountable for the
pressing presentation of this whole realm of the unreal. Rāmānuja
counters both these propositions. Observability is not a mark of
the unreal, for even the objects of dream-observation constitute
fragments of reality. More so is the object of unvitiated observation.
Its being unvitiated is made known through non-contradiction.
	The
principle of svataḥ-prāmāņya stands rejected by such an unmitigated
	As noted against Vijñāna-vāda, such a subjectivism
subjectivism.
annihilates its own claim to truth. Change by itself is no mark
of the unreal. Variation is not self-stultification. Early Buddhism
blundered in defining the real as the changeable, and this theory is
trapped in the other extreme of confounding dynamism with contra-
dictoriness. It is possible to have a judgment with the maximum
measure of non-contradiction and still the judgment might be about
a datum obtaining at a passing point of time. The denial of multipli-
city through a critique of the very concept of 'difference' is disproved
by Rāmānuja by a refutation of that critique.<sup>1</sup> We need not go into
details but only note the drift of the polemics.
	The hypothesis of cosmic nescience receives elaborate considera-
tion from Rāmānuja. In the Srī-bhāşya in the mahāsiddhānta devoted
to the criticism of Advaita, he develops seven objections against it.
This is a justly famous discussion. We can only enunciate the crucial
points of the seven-fold argument.
	(i) Nescience needs an intelligent seat or victim for it to hap-
pen. The victim in the case cannot be the absolute spirit for the
very nature of the latter is self-luminosity and antagonism to
	It cannot be the finite individual, for the latter
misconstruction.
emerges as a consequence of the operation of nescience.
	(ii) Nescience is supposed to cover up the real for misrepresen-
tation to arise as a consequence. But concealing or covering up is
to obstruct or prevent revelation. As the spirit is of the essence of
self-revelation, concealing it must mean its annihilation. As it is
indivisible, this must be total.
	The effect of nescience is held to be the presentation of
	(iii)
what is neither real nor unreal. This is an impossible middle position
between contradictory alternatives.
	The ontological status of nescience requires specific enun-
	(iv)
	It cannot be phenomenal, for all phenomenal presentation
ciation.
is built on its basis. It cannot be noumenal, for, in that case, it must
either be identical with the only noumenal entity posited or there
	Either Brahman is nescience or it is
should be duality of ultimates.
not one without a second.
	There is no ground for positing it. The author of the
	(v)
Vivaraņa has framed several proofs for it. Rāmānuja quotes the entire
argument and finds every proof fallacious.
	The termination of nescience is inconceivable on the postu-
	(vi)
lates of Advaita. The termination of it is itself a phenomenal
event set up by another nescience. There can be no perishing of the
nescience series.
	(vii) What destroys nescience must either fall outside Brahman,
in which case it is part of what nescience itself projects, or be one
with Brahman, in which case as Brahman is an eternal actuality,
nescience and its effects must have stood eternally destroyed.
	Rāmānuja further develops his criticism bringing to focus the
metaphysical pronouncements of the Upanişads, for, they constitute
the fundamental authority for Vedanta.
	In this connection some
important corrective clarifications are to be made.
	Rāmānuja keeps apart his criticism of Advaita in terms of
	(a)
reason from the exegetical criticism. He attaches primary significance
	He says in one important discussion' that even confor-
to the first.
mity to the sacred scripture cannot validate an intrinsically irrational
	If the hard choice was forced upon him to accept the
doctrine.
doctrine or reject the scripture, he makes clear that he would em-
brace the second alternative.
	In the choice of texts for discussion in this connection,
	he
	(b)
attends primarily to the apparently Advaitic texts. Though in the
formulation of his final philosophical standpoint, he seeks to do full
justice to all texts, including those that are specially favourable to
that standpoint, in his polemical confrontation with Advaita he pays
exclusive and elaborate attention to the Upanisadic declarations that
are held highest in Advaita and seem to accord sanction to that
school to the utmost.
	(c) He discovers and it is a happy discovery for him that all
the principal Upanişadic passages relied upon in Advaita refuse to
yield the philosophy sought to be derived from them.
	We can only indicate in a very summary fashion his treatment of
the passages. The passages that speak of Brahman as nirguna just
mean, if we examine the contexts, that it is free from material
properties and those that are of the nature of imperfection. The very
passages have affirmative glorifications and also specify precisely the
	Definitions of Brahman such as
attributes negated of the Supreme.
the Tatttiriya text, 'the real, knowledge and infinite', the Aitareya
description of it as 'supreme consciousness', and the Bī hadāraņyaka
calling it 'distinctive knowledge and bliss' only signify the defining
attributes and do deny neither the substantive being of Brahman nor
	It is also untenable to take them in a negative
its other attributes.
sense, denying the very attributes ascribed to it.
	In Upanişadic
parlance essential attributes are often mentioned in the place of the
substantives.
	The passages such as 'neti, neti' and those that refer to the ineffa-
bility and inconceivability of Brahman do not assert its absolute
inaccessibility to thought and speech, but the inadequacy of our
characterization of it. This is a very effective way of conveying the
infinite. Incidentally, infinitude does not mean the absence of other
entities altogether, but the absence of other entities, not included and
	All-inclusiveness is the primary significane of
not sustained by it.
infinitude. This direction of interpretation is justified on the ground
that the reality or unreality of other entities is to be described by the
evidence presenting them (dharmi-grāhaka-māna) and not by a defini-
tion of Brahman as 'infinite''. The positive interpretation in the
sense of inclusiveness secures its veracity by itself, by just completing
what the evidence in favour of the other entities convey about them.
The Infinite is a completing and not a cancelling concept.
	There
	many ponouncements scattered through almost all
are, of course,
	If the related contexts are scruti-
the <i>Upanişads</i> denying plurality.
nized, it becomes clear that in them Brahman is said to assimilate all
diversity of existences as a part or effect of itself and therefore the
negation of plurality should be legitimately construed as negating a
plurality of entities as not subsumed under that scheme of integration.
Plurality as such is not negatived, but only plurality as not included
in the all-embracing totality of divine existence is rightly negatived.
The most important passages in the Upanişads declaring that Brah-
man is the same as the individual self, as the famous 'Tattvamasi'
does, are decisive in the context.
	Rāmānuja devotes extensive
exegetical attention to this particular passage. By a thorough exami-
nation of the whole chapter in the concerned Upanişad, Rāmānuja
advances the interpretation that the passage just signifies that Brah-
man is the ground and sustaining principle of the whole cosmos and
also the inner soul of the individual soul itself. The world-soul has
graciously lodged itself within the soul of man. 'Tattvam asi' is the
declaration of this supreme truth.  The passage implies no attribute-
less absolute, no unreality of the world and no fictitious character of
the individual finite personality. It is no case of a world-sublating
immanence, but a world-upholding immanence. All similar passages
like 'Aham brahmāsmi' call for a similar elucidation.
	No interpretative ingenuity can squeeze out of the <i>Upanişads</i> the
required doctrine of māyā. There are only one or two uses of the
word māyā, and in them it signifies wondrous power. The passage
in the Brhadāranyaka is itself a quotation from the Rgveda,1 and in
that ancient text the Deity is said to be resplendent through māyā.
Illusion is a calamity or a distortion. It cannot constitute an instru-
ment of splendour. The absolute Spirit cannot be associated with
'delusions of grandeur' as either the subject or the object. The
standard Advaitic sense of māyā as a power that conceals, as unspiri-
tual, as something to be overcome and as subject to elimination does
not suit this early usage adopted in the <i>Upanisad</i>.<sup>2</sup> It is true that the
Upaņisads speak a great deal about avidyā. But this avidyā is the cause
of man's bondage and not the source of the cosmos.
	Bondage itself,
the sum total of evil, is no unreality. Avidyā in the sense of ignorance
of Brahman involves the individual in a real chain of real evils,
unworthy of his potentialities and high destiny.  The curative process
is no less an ontological verity.
	Liberation, therefore, cannot lie merely in a correction of pers-
pective but high, sustained and integrated endeavour of the whole soul
of man, which the Gitā calls bhakti. More of this later.
	Such, in brief, is Rāmānuja's elucidation of the Upanişadic evi-
dence supposed to present the doctrine of Advaita.

CHAPTER III

THE METAPHYSICS OF VISISTADVAITA

	The orientation of Rāmānuja's philosophy and his critical reac-
tion to other currents of philosophy which we have noted somewhat
releases us into a direct consideration of the fundamentals of his
	The last discussion of the import of the monistic procla-
philosophy.
mations of the <i>Upanişads</i> furnishes a natural point of transition to his
constructive thesis. He is a Vedantin, and the philosophy he pro-
pounds is claimed to be built up on the teachings of the <i>Upanişads</i>.
	This naturally requires some recapitulation of his epistemologi-
cal position. We must be clear with regard to what he takes as the
sources of his philosophical insight. We have already seen that he is
adverse on strongly expressed grounds to the denunciation of empiri-
cal knowledge gathered through perception. He is equally emphatic
that empirical knowledge is a part, only a part, of the edifice of
knowledge. Reason, signified by terms such as anumāna or tarka is
	5
also a veritical pathway to truth. There is no anti-intellectualism in
Viśisțādvaita. The familiar attacks on reasoning framed by the
Cārvāka, later Buddhism and Srī Harşa are all decisively answerable.
The Nyāya account of reason can stand with further refinements and
in the definitive form in which it is restated in Visistadvaita.
	But
rationalism is not the last rung in the ladder of knowledge. There
are super-sensuous and therefore super-rational realities access to
which has to be gained by another way of knowing. That way of
knowing is through <i>sabda</i> or testimony. Following the Mimāmsakas
and other Vedantins, there is an affirmation of the truth of the
impersonal revelation embodied in the Vedas. This is the all-trans-
cending and all-completing source of knowledge. Its validity is testi-
fied to by the application of the principle of svatah-prāmāņya, and
that in so far as it goes beyond the deliverances of the two other
pramāņas and is also free from contradiction from them.
	It answers
the basic questions of philosophy unanswered by them and unanswer-
able in their plane, and imparts to knowledge integration and com-
prehensiveness. There is compulsiveness in this <i>pramāna</i> by virtue of
the criteria of self-evidence, non-contradiction, positive coherence and
the ideal of completeness. In the Vedas themselves the earlier section
apparently concerns itself with ultimate issues only indirectly what-
ever be its undoubted metaphysical and mystical background and
intimations. The <i>Upanisads</i>, on the other hand, directly and by
explicit intention devote themselves to the articulation of ultimate
philosophical truth. Sudarsana Sūri sees this fact in the very etymo-
logical derivation of the term 'upanişad'1 and Rāmānuja holds
that Brahman, the supreme reality, is distinctly and effulgently
revealed in them. 'Vidipta'' is his expression. Hence the word
Vedānta is applied to them and sometimes by the Upanişads themselves.
In the interpretation of the <i>Upanişads</i> Rāmānuja claims that he is
following two canons.<sup>8</sup> They must be taken in their totality as
expounding a single integrated doctrine and as divesting no part or
aspect of their teaching of primacy of signification. This is in con-
tradistinction to some other interpretations, which not merely negate
the truth of other <i>pramāņas</i> but also negate the truth-value of certain
texts of the <i>Upanisads</i> themselves or assign to them lower truth-value.
Sometimes the same text is stratified into the teachings of lower
and higher wisdom. There are interpreters who glorify certain types
of texts and struggle to read a secondary or figurative import into
other types. This, according to Rāmānuja, is not being fair to the
accepted revelation. He also points out that there is a substantial
degree of mutual implication and any one type of teaching stresssed
exclusively discloses gaps and want of intelligibility. Pursuing this
logic Rāmānuja takes up all types of Upanişadic teaching, be they
affirmations of Brahman's transcendence or immanence, of the unity
of reality or plurality, of the unity between the individual self and God
or their distinction, of the glory of Divine attributes or the denial of
attributes, and discovers in each type an equally significant aspect of
ultimate truth and sees in the aggregate of texts the presentation of
an organically unified conception of ultimate reality. With this
interpretative perspective he formulates his version of Vedānta.
	The single theme of Vedānta is Brahman. Brahman, according
to Rāmānuja, is the reality which is infinite, all-perfect in itself 1 and is
such that imparts perfection to finite individuals. Infinitude means
eternal being, all-pervasiveness and all-inclusiveness in the sense that
every other entity-we shall presently see that there are other entit-
ies-is sustained in its being through the permeating presence of
Brahman in it.<sup>2</sup> The <i>Upanişads</i> speak of it as sat, satya, satyasya
satyam, as its existence is unconditioned and absolute. It is also
infinite consciousness, in the sense of being a knower who eternally
and immediately apprehends all. It is no mere awareness but a self-
affirming and all-cognizing Spirit. It is the supreme self or persona-
lity. Hereafter we may speak of Brahman in terms suitable to persona.
lity. Brahman is free from all imperfection, for the very devotion to
Brahman brings about perfection. It does not have the mutability
of mere matter and the infirmities of finite self-hood.  These features
imply a further fact. Brahman must be of the nature of joy, delight
or bliss. Bliss comes of a full exercise of the self's nature by way of
comprehension; and the contemplation of the infinite by itself or by
another, is the essence of bliss. These five characterizations of
Brahman, as satya, jñ àna. ānanda, nirmala and ananta, define the basic
being or substantial essence of Brahman. This is svarūpa-nirūpaņa.<sup>8</sup>
	Now this <i>svarūpa</i> carries an infinitude of attributes of the nature.
perfection. Many attributes of Brahman are spoken of in the
Upanişads with ardour, ādara, according to Rāmānuja.<sup>4</sup> The attri-
butes are given a six-fold classification by Pāncarātra. Vedānta Deśika
opines that they are reducible, in the final analysis, to jñāna and šakti.
A problem in connection with attributes must be faced at this stage.
Why posit attributes? How are the attributes related to the sub-
stantive being, svarūpa?
	. What exists is to be learnt through our means of knowing.
"Mānādhīnā meyasiddhiņ." All our means of knowing point to
reality as determined by attributes or characteristics. When some
attributes are denied of the concerned object, the clearly discerned
attributes of it should supply the basis for the denial. When we
correct our misconceptions about anything, we do so compelled
by our cognition of its character which is incompatible with the mis-
conception of being true. Thus in both affirmative and negative
judgments a 'that' is always characterized by a 'what'. So if reality
is to be construed by the deliverance of our modes of knowledge, the
concept of reality as characterized by attributes is inescapable.
	To
be real is to be determined by qualitative features. Even self-conscious-
ness is awareness of the self as exercising awareness.<sup>2</sup> When the
Upanişads speak of Brahman as 'attributeless,' they deny of it quali-
ties constitutive of imperfections. The three gunas of Sānkhya do
not belong to Brahman. This interpretation is governed by the two-
fold consideration <sup>9</sup> that there are explicit denials of imperfections
particularizing the general characterization as 'attributeless', and
they abound in positive attribution of excellences. That is why the
Brahma-sūtra freely speaks of the guna and dharma of the ultimate
reality.<sup>4</sup>
	A wholly unnecessary confusion prevails over the relation of
guņa to guņi, or dharma to dharmi. The attribute must be other than
the substance in order to make a difference to it. It is the 'ittham'
of the 'idam'. But it cannot be different in the sense of being ontologi-
cally or epistemically separate from it, calling for a linking category
such as samaväya. In its very nature it subsists in the substance
being inseparable from it in reality and thought. This is the situation
to which the concept of 'aprthaksiddhi' is applied. Inseparability
and distinction are the differentia of the attribute, without which no
substance can be a reality.
	Sankara seems to concede the case for the qualitative determi-
nateness of Brahman in his justification of Vedantic inquiry. The
Brahman being one with Atman is self-established in our primordial
self-awareness, and still there is considerable disagreement among
thinkers with regard to the specific characterization of Brahman.
Hence for purposes of resolving the dispute and determining the right
characterization of Brahman, 'viśesa,' the inquiry is held to be neces-
sary. The argument does not discountenance the 'viśeşa' altogether.1
	The qualities of the Supreme principle are literally infinite, and
when thought and speech fail, it is this abundance of qualitative per-
fection that baffles them. The qualities lend themselves to some
kind of classification.
	There are, in the first place, qualities that go to constitute Brah-
man's majesty and unimaginable height of greatness. Such are
omniscience and omnipotence and infinitude itself. They are together
described as <i>paratva</i>. There are again qualities that signify the love,
compassion and grace of the Supreme. These are called collectively
the saulabhya of Brahman; On the pattern of the Vedānta-sūtra, it is
also common to classify the attributes into four types. There are
those that are expressed in the sovereignty, the ultimate and undivided
causality of the cosmos, on the part of Brahman. . He is the sole
power and substance from the metaphysical point of view.
	He or it
also transcends every type of limitation, deficiency and evil, charac-
teristic of matter and the finite spirits. Brahman has every perfection
implied in its being, the final power sublimating the finite self to per-
fection. Lastly, Brhman is such that experiential attainment of it
constitutes that perfection. Vedanta Desika names these four
sets kāraņatvam, abādhyatvam, upāyatvam and upeyatā, corresponding
the four chapters of the Brahma-sūtra.2 These varied to
classifications of divine attributes do not introduce a tension or
discord into the Divine, for they supplement each other. Paratva, as
Vedanta Deśika points out, becomes a defect,<sup>1</sup> if it does not issue in
love and compassion; and mere compassion not backed by paratva is
an affliction to both the subject and object.<sup>2</sup> Both divine might and
divine mercy are necessary for the purpose of 'soul-making'; only their
fusion can actualize the conservation of values.
	In addition to these majesty-attributes and grace-attributes, if
we may simplify their designations, Rāmānuja posits aesthetic attri-
butes.<sup>8</sup> This is a striking novelty and he asserts that the Vedantic
scriptures are unambiguous and emphatic on the point. He finds no
difficulty in putting together the aesthetic descriptions of Brahman in
the Upanişads themselves and does not rely merely on the semi-mytho-
logical and semi-anthropomorphic accounts of God's beauty in the
later Purānas and Agamas. After all, the beauty of nature and the
sublimity of the human soul, the aesthetic aspects of finite existences.
are meagre intimations of the Divine shining through them. This is
a well-expressed doctrine of the Gitā itself.<sup>4</sup> Matter in its true meta-
physical character is not undivine, and beauty itself is not a physical
property. There is surely a 'natural - supernaturalism' even in earth-
ly beauty. Nothing but the semitic prejudice could treat this exten-
sion of the aesthetic category to Divinity as strange or objectionable.
Tirumangai Alvar, says Vedanta Desika, was a dehātma-vādin about
God.<sup>6</sup>
	Thus far, we have attempted to gather the doctrine about the
central and undivided metaphysical ultimate, Brahman. We have
seen that it abounds in an infinity of glorious attributes.
	Now we have to descend to a consideration of the lower field of
reality consisting of material existence and finite souls. It is Rāmā-
nuja's characteristic doctrine that they also form a realm of attri-
butes qualifying Brahman. In fact, there is only one substantive
reality, with the normal attributes like knowledge and love, and the
realm of finite realities also constituting its attributes.
	The whole
expanse of reality consists of one divine substance with all else inclu-
sive of the finites forming its adjectival circumference.
	Hence this
school is legitimately named Viśişta-advaita, a theory that holds
reality to consist of a single subject with all else as its predicates.
We will go into this idea of the finite reality as adjectival to the
infinite in some detail later on. Now, we shall consider broadly the
finite reals.
	One part of finite reality consists of the physical or insentient
realm of being. For Rāmānuja, it is undeniably real and the argu-
ments of later Buddhism and Advaita refuting its reality are fallaci-
	While it is not all that is real, it is an irreducible ontological
ous.
	It consists of three constituents, Suddha-sattva (Nitya-
principle.
vibhūti, celestial matter without the anti-spiritual potentialities of
rajas and tamas); Time or Kāla-which is no illusion-exercising
great power in the world we know, but wholly subdued in the eternal
order of Divine manifestation; and mundane nature, characterized
by saltva, rajas and tamas. The first division is posited on the ground
of Scriptural testimony which cannot be explained away. The last
is what constitutes our nature and all Nature-philosophy concerns
that.
	A number of categories listed in Nyāyā-Vaiseşika as qualifying
the physical, such as Karma, Sāmānya, Viśeşa and Samavāya are
eliminated in this school, and only the Sānkhya category of three
guņas is admitted along with the well-known five sense-qualities.
Two more are added, Samyoga and Sakti. The entire group of these
subsidiary categories are named 'adravya', non-substance. The physi-
cal substance is one as maintained by the Sankhya school, and it is
said to be subject to evolution more or less as pictured in Sānkhya.
The senses fall into the realm of effects and they are eleven including
those of action and mind. The elements which are five are products
of the unitary source and have subtle and gross forms. They be-
come objects of perception after being suitably mixed up by way of
	By prāņa is meant the principle of life and it is no
pañcikarana.
separate principle but air itself in a special functional configuration sus-
taining the life-process. The evolution is primary in the sense of emer-
gence of the elementals and secondary and gross in the sense of the origi-
nation of the worlds and the living creature in them. This cosmolo-
gical account is nothing very special to the school. What is special
is the specification of the ontological status of physical nature. It is
a teleological order produced, sustained and periodically withdrawn,
by God, forming his sportive splendour, lilā-vibhūti, and is designed
for the perfection of the finite souls still struggling for the attainment
of God. His aesthetic creativity and compassionate concern are the
primary springs of the cosmic process.  This physical order has Brah-
man as its central moving factor, its very soul, and exists, endures
and varies as He operates it to that effect. This dependence makes
it adjectival to Him, His viśeșaņa. It moves from causal states to
those of effects. Causation is conceived on Sankhya lines as a conti-
nuous process of self-transformation. In this connection there is a
problem. Rāmānuja regards God as the all-sufficient cause of the
world-order, its efficient and material cause. The material cause has
to undergo modification in the process of causation. Does Brah-
man also change? The answers lies in our conception of the effect
in question. The effect, considered in its fullness, is the manifest
world, not in itself, but as embedded in and ensouled by Brahman.
Brahman embodied in the gross universe is the full effect. Of that,
Brahman containing within Himself the universe in its subtle state,
is the cause. The totality of Brahman with the subtle universe trans-
forms Himself into Brahman with the gross universe.<sup>1</sup> There is no
materialization of Brahman and no mutation of a physical kind.
Brahman indwelling the world in both states retains His fundamental
nature and the only change attributable to Him is the change that
He chooses to maintain it in mere potentiality in the causal state and
to bring it into manifestation in the other. The direction of His
cosmic control varies but there is no alteration of substance.
The implicated variation is a form of divine perfection and adorable
glory, kalyānaguņa.
	The other division of finite reality, named parāprakṛti in the Gītā
consists of the finite selves. The finite self is a reality, not a function
or product of matter and not also a distorted presentation or
misconstruction of Brahman. It is a distinct and irreducible metaphy-
sical principle. As in the case of nature, it should be added at once,
that it is a part of reality, sustained, and actuated by the infinite
God-head and subserving the Divine in an adjectival capacity. It
reveals itself to itself in ineradicable self-consciousness and thus cons-
titutes the metaphysical ego, not to be confounded with the degene-
rate ego which identifies itself with the not-self. The metaphysical self
is a personality and it is in this character that it admits of philosophi-
cal proof. What lacks personality belongs to the category of the
unspiritual.<sup>1</sup> It is said to be atomic not in the sense that it is a mate-
rial particle but in that it has no spatial dimension and is also finite.
While it is self-affirming consciousness, it also exercises consciousness
by way of knowing in relation to the rest of existence, the supreme
Being, other finite selves and the material world. This outward aspect
of consciousness is called <i>dharma-bhūta-jñāna</i>, adjectival knowledge, the
substantive knowledge being the consciousness of the self by itself.
The latter is no self-contradiction in cognition, while such an iden-
tity of the object, may very well be self-contradictory in the realm of
action. Dharma-bhūta-jñāna is an eternal attribute of the self admit-
ting of decrease and increase in its range of operation in the case of
the finite self. In the condition of samsāra, when the self is involved
in evil and transmigration from life to life according to its karma, the
knowledge in question is attenuated. In the blessedness of salvation
it expands to infinity apprehending God and His glories.
	All modes
of knowing investigated in epistemology are specific forms of
dharma-bhūta-jñāna itself. It is a substance in that it admits of such
modifications, but is inalienably an attribute of the self.<sup>2</sup> A sub-
stance being an attribute is a recognized possibility in Viśişţādvaita.
This happens in all cases of inalienably dependent substances.
	In
addition to cognition, dharma-bhūta-jñāna expresses itself as volition
and emotion. These three functions of consciousness are not separate
faculties but organically continuous workings of the single power of
consciousness.<sup>8</sup> In volition, the finite self enjoys autonomy and
freedom of initiative, with which it is endowed by God for purposes
of fulfilling itself through pursuits of self-chosen values. The freedom
of the finite individual is not a limitation of divine sovereignty but as
consequence of it.<sup>1</sup> God wills the emergence of willing individuals.
This is a proof of the fullness of His creative prowess. He is a Creator
of creators. There is no 'soul-making' without the self itself shaping
its destiny, without the impediments of a compulsory bondage or
even compulsory redemption. There is a plurality of finite selves.
All the principles of individuation, such as the diversities of dharma-
bhūta-jñāna, and the non-participation in one another's experience
are inherent in the metaphysical self. Between the body and the
soul, it is the soul that constitutes the principle of individuation.
While the manyness of individual selves is a metaphysical and end-
uring fact, their inequalities are not so. They are adventitious being
part of the vicissitudes of samsāra. The restrictions and gradation of
dharma-bhūta-jñāna obtain only in the stage of bondage, and emanci-
pation from it must bring about the state of complete and natural
equality. In its inward metaphysical nature every jiva is equal to
every other jiva in respect of fundamental constitution, powers and
possibilities.<sup>2</sup>
	There are three classes of souls in spite of this basic equality.
There are souls that are eternally free, and they enjoy the rapturous
union with God through all eternity. They are called Nityas or
Nityasūris. The postulation of this category of souls is entirely
owing to scriptural declarations to that effect. There are souls that
have passed through the life in bondage and have attained liberation
by the grace of God. They are called Muktas.
	There are souls
still in bondage, Baddhas, and they have to work for emancipation.
There are no souls predetermined for eternal, damnation 'condemned
by an accursed nature'. Viśişţādvaita takes up the conception of
bondage as standardized by the <i>Upanişads</i> and the <i>Brahma-sūtra</i>. The
doctrine of karma and rebirth is admitted, and the mechanics of
rebirth as detailed in the major Upanişads, such as Brhadāraņyaka,
Chāndogya and Kausītaki receives necessary clarifications and co-ordi-
nation on the lines laid down by the Sūtra. While the essential
principles are capable of philosophical formulation, the eschatological
description is admitted simply on scriptural authority. The soul as
such is unoriginated and eternal. But in its mundane and unregenerate
career it passes through the cycles of births and deaths.
	While
the whole of bondage is a fictitious evil for Advaita, the Viśişţād-
vaitin, holding as he does that bondage is real and requires methods
of cure over and above simple enlightenment, attaches a more
literal value to the scriptural accounts of transmigration. In his
picture of salvation also, considerable eschatology pertaining to the
liberation-bound soul's passage beyond embodiment till he attains
the final state of blessedness, is accorded serious consideration and
acceptance on the lines indicated in the relevant
	Upanişadic
passages.
	The final thought with which we can conclude this account of
the finite individual according to Viśişţādvaita is its insistence that
jiva, along with nature, is an adjectival dimension of the supreme
Atman and is ensouled by him. Nature and the souls together
constitute the body of God. Fuller treatment of this central thought
must be attempted in the sequel.
	Incidentally, this seems to be a proper place to put together all
the ideas that Rāmānuja takes over exclusively from the scriptures
and for which no contradiction or confirmation is possible from other
pramāņas. They are such that no indirect philosophical justification
is available except that discarding a part of the scripture, while we
rely on other parts, is illogical. The case is not only so much on
some other doctrines such as Brahman being saguņa, Brahman's
causality of the world, the distinctness of the jiva from the body and
so on. In those other cases, rejection of the scriptural affirmation
leads to other contradictions, in addition to the untenability of
admitting the <i>sruti</i> in parts. This, perhaps, is the purely theological
part of Viśişţādvaita. The doctrines concerned are the attribution
of beauty of form to Brahman, the recognition of a realm of
celestial matter, Suddhasattva or Nitya-vibhūti, a class of individual
souls in beginningless freedom, Nitya-sūris, and the eschatology of
transmigration and that of emancipation. May be, there is a
profound symbolism in all this. The Brahma-sūtra sets aside the
literal interpretation of some of the elements mentioned in connection
with the process of the departure of the release-bound jīva. The
principle through which the whole position can be defended is stated
surprisingly by Sankara himself, the least theological of the
Vedāntic commentators. If a scriptural declaration agrees with
other pramāņas, it is merely a reiteration and cannot be taken as the
original teaching of it. If it conflicts with the other pramāņas, it
must be given a secondary or figurative interpretation. If it is such
that it neither repeats nor conflicts with them, and if we have respect
for the deliverance of the <i>pramāņa</i>, we must take it as truth and not
in any secondary signification. This, perhaps, gives the key to the
right adjudgment of the matter.<sup>1</sup>
	We must now attempt a satisfactory statement of the funda-
mental contribution of Rāmānuja to the understanding of the relation
of the finite reals, (the individual selves and physical nature) to the
supreme reality, Brahman. The problem presses for consideration
for two reasons. The finite reals are not unreal or phenomenal.
They are metaphysical verities. In the second place, they cannot
be accorded reality as independent and self-sufficient entities. Such a
position is contrary to the whole spirit and letter of the Upanisads,
according to Rāmānuja.<sup>9</sup> Vedānta stands for a unitary conception
of reality. There are not merely passages denouncing radical
pluralism; there are affirmations to the effect that the knowing of
Brahman includes a knowledge of all existence. There are also
straight and explicit statements that 'Brahman is all this', 'Brahman
ensouls all this', 'Puruşa is all this'. The only theistic thesis possible
is that though there are three reals, one is self-dependent and on it
all else depend. Brahman is the self-determining Supreme and it is
also all-determining, and the rest of the reals is utterly subordinate
to it, drawing substance and significance from it. Even this normal
theistic solution leaves on our hand three factors, Brahman, the
attributes of Brahman involved in the maintenance of the subordi-
nate entities, and the essential substantive svarūpa of the entities in
question. The subordination of the finite might strike as external
domination, not sufficiently bringing out the unitary character of the
situation. It is in this context that Rāmānuja propounds his unique
doctrine. He holds that the subordinate reals themselves form an
attributive dimension of Brahman. They fall into the expanse of
his existence, as his other well-known attributes like knowledge and
power do, in an adjectival status and capacity. It is not that
Brahman with His attributes and the finite reals exist. There is no
'and' in this case. Brahman alone exists with His attributes and the
jīva and jagat, cit and acit, are also His attributes. Brahman resplen-
dent with His attributes is the sole reality. The problem of the
finite limiting the infinite does not arise, for the finite itself is a
constitutive factor in the totality of the infinite in all its glory and
dimensions.<sup>1</sup>
	Rāmānuja adopts several modes of explaining this fact He
says, for instance, that the cit and acit are the prakara or visesana
of Brahman and that the latter is the prakārin or višeşya, the two
together constituting a visisia. This is employing the logical
categories of subject and predicate. He says of the world that it is
dharmasthāniya<sup>2</sup> in relation to God. This is using the categories of
substance and attribute. Again, using dynamic categories, he says
the world of finites is the <i>šakti</i> and Brahman, the subject wleiding
that power. He also says that the finites form a part or amsa and
that the Supreme is the whole, amsin, because the totality of the
divine reality contains its adjectival modes as its own constituents.<sup>8</sup>
Perhaps, the most characteristic and inclusive manner of setting
forth the metaphysical position is to regard the world of selves and
matter as the body and God as the Soul embodied in it. By body,
Rāmānuja understands what is supported, controlled and appropriat-
ed by a personal spirit and that spirit is the soul in the situation.
The world is the ādheya, niyāmya, and śeşa of God; and God is the
ādhāra, niyantā, and śeşi.4 This relation is coterminous with the
reality of the body. Apart from it, the body loses its being and
intelligibility. This is the <i>aprthak siddha</i> relation. It also implies the
ideas of pervasion and inward control. The Brhadāranyaka speaks of
Brahman as antaryāmin. This is commanding immanence. Another
way of expressing the position is adopted in the Gītā in the concep-
tion of the world as the 'Vibhūti' of God,<sup>6</sup> meaning glory or
splëndour.
	This conception secures two points of capital philosophical im-
	The soul, in its intrinsic nature, transcends the body and
portance.
is untouched by the distinctive vicissitudes of the body like birth and
	Similarly, God is unaffected by the mutability of matter and
death.
the infirmities of the finite self. The body of creatures affects their souls
also, not because of the relation but because the embodiment is
brought about by the binding karma of the soul concerned. As for
the supreme soul, as it is not embodied the corrupting force of karma,
the freedom from the evil influences of the body<sup>1</sup> stands. Embodi-
ment in this case is unmixed glory and not a retributive incarnation.
So this transcendence is the one point of importance. The second
point is that the monism of the philosophy is thoroughly maintained
as the body is a part of the embodied soul, and the supreme reality
understood in all its riches of attributes and glories, includes in itself
its cosmic body. The popular conception that the soul is a part of
the body must be corrected, as in reality the body is a part of the
embodied soul. Vedānta Deśika puts the central thought in a memor-
able aphorism, "aseşa-cidacit-prakāram brahmaikameva tattvam".
	There is one problem that may arise in connection with the utter
immanence of God in all creatures and also his omnipotence and
goodness. That is the problem of evil. The problem must be pro-
perly localized or cornered to see the Viśişţādvaitic manner or its
solution. There is no evil, however understood, in God's intrinsic
nature as such, as He is transcendent. There is no evil in matter as
such, except to a soul that sees matter as uninhabited by the Divine.
In the <i>jivātman</i>, there is no evil in its intrinsic nature, which carries
all the potency for perfection and whose full manifestation is what
constitutes perfection or salvation. There is no evil for the finite self
which is either a Mukta or Nitya. There is evil only in the experi-
ence of the Baddha-soul in its state of bondage.  Evil is of two forms,
suffering and sin, described normally as natural evil and moral evil.
The evil of suffering is explained in Hindu thought in general as the
consequence of moral evil. This is the import of the doctrine of
karma. The essence of moral evil or sin lies in the pursuit of a God-
less career, shutting out, as it were, the consciousness of God and
seeking values other than God. That a life founded on God-negation
should involve the soul in question in suffering is a negative demonst-
ration of the fact that all peace and joy are to be found in God only.
One cannot refuse God and have the blessedness and fulfilment that
could flow only from communion with Him. This is determined by
the very nature of things, the nature of the soul, the nature of God
and the nature of ultimate value. One cannot have the infinite
good through a negation of the infinite itself. Then the problem
shifts to sin, or God-negation itself. How can an individual so intimate-
ly embedded in God and forming His inseparable embodiment or
mode indulge in the defilement of denying Him or unawareness of Him?
Does not the imperfection of attribute imply the imperfection of the
substance, especially when there is eternal inseparability as posited?
Now the jīvātman is a spirit and not a material tool of God; and to
be a spirit is to be a free agent with moral freedom. This freedom
also is an endowment from God but it is freedom in reality. This
freedom is a necessary requirement for the soul to become all that it
has to become and all that it has in it to become. Spiritual perfec-
tion is an attainment through creative effort. An imposed perfection
is the perfection of matter and not that of a soul. A puruşārtha is a
goal to be sought freely by a purusa. Freedom implies the possibility
of choosing other ends and seeing through their unworthiness
through the hard but convincing way of experiment and the conse-
quent wisdom of experience. Evil as sin is the exploitation of this
possibility. It is not the final term in the process, for it invokes the
corrective frustration through suffering. In this connection, suffering
almost becomes a blessing, whatever be its immediate impact.<sup>1</sup>
	In
the meanwhile, sin at the time of its perpetration must belong
exclusively to the spiritual agent, for that is the precise significance
of freedom, the sole accountability of the agent.<sup>2</sup> That the agent
intimately belongs to God is not abrogated, but the fact of being the
agent would be unreal if the choice of sin were to extend beyond the
agent. God is no inactive background, as he sustains the individual
in his creative initiative and envelops him with corrective pressures
and persuasive inducements. All this heavy preparation is for making
him make the right choice by his own individual initiative and experimental
wisdom. For a large and profound enough theism, evil presents no
intractable problem.
	With this necessarily slight indication of the way in which the
problem of evil is sought to be met in Viśişţādvaita, we may return
to the topic of God's transcendence-immanence brought out in the
characteristic doctrine that God is the infinite soul and the entire
universe of finite reality consisting of the three kinds of acit, and the
three classes of cit, constitutes the body of that soul. It is exhibited
by Rāmānuja as hinted and assumed in the entire Vedic literature
and that the <i>Upanişads</i> proclaim this central truth with all possible
weight, throughout the great texts and particularly in the Brhadāra-
nyaka, in the peak-dialogue. The later religious literature such as
the Mahābhārata, Rāmāyana, Vişņu-purāņa, Āgamas, and even the
Smrtis such as that of Manu and Apastamba reiterate it as a delibe-
rate summary of the <i>Upanişadic</i> philosophy.
	With this, perhaps, we may conclude the metaphysics
	of
Viśiąţādvaita. While doing so it is appropriate to mention that the
esoteric tradition in Visistadvaita maintains that the concept of
Nārāyaņa contains within itself the entire metaphysical philosophy
of Brahman. Nārāyaņa abides in all and envelops all. He is the
spring and sustaining ground of all finite existence. He abounds in
perfections beyond number and utterly beyond every trace of evil.
He is such that the finite soul should realize its ultimate good through
His paramount instrumentality. It is in the vision of Him, absolute
and eternal, that its ultimate good really lies. There is no meta-
physical truth not contained in the elucidation of this designation of
Brahman. It is in the fitness of things that the <i>Upanisad</i> proclaims
"Nārāyaṇaparam brahma, tattvam nārāyanaḥ paraḥ". The terms such
as Sai, Akşara, Purvşa, Brahman, Jyoti, Âtman, merge in this, as it
carries to completion their intended import. It is the supreme name
of the supreme Reality.1

CHAPTER IV

PURUSARTHA

	(1) That philosophy is no mere understanding of reality however
well authenticated' is an established, conviction in Indian philosophy.
It is not merely <i>pramāņa-šāstra</i> and <i>tattv-šāstra</i>. It is also an inquiry
into the goals of life, which too press for rational scrutiny and consi-
dered formulation in the light of all the means of knowing bearing on
	It is a purușārtha-šāstra also. It cannot stop even there.
the issue.
It is no mere discernment of the ends of life, however systematic and
critical it may be, but a right and equally thorough adjudgement of
the ways of achieving the philosophically framed ideals. Thus, it is
also a sādhana-šāstra, the science of the pathways of realization, open
to us, of the ends in question. It may turn out, in the final analysis,
that the reality, goal and the means ', tend to fuse into a single
principle, but in the preliminary inquiry, they are to be investigated
into as three spheres of philosophical concern. Viśişţādvaita, there-
fore, holds that the complete function of philosophy is the thorough
determination of tattva, hita meaning sādhana, and puruşārtha. In the
order of actualisation the sādhana precedes puruşārtha, but in that of
conception, the puru-şārtha has priority.
	(2) There is a conventional scheme of four values in the Indian
tradition, dharma artha and kāma and mokṣa.
	The first three
	are
called trivarga and the last is named apavarga. There is also a traditi-
nal valuation of them. Artha and kāma are transitary goods and are
partial, if not actually trivial, fulfilments of life. Dharma,
	conceived
as a plan for procuring them, shares their limitations. If pursued as
an end in itself, it is subsumed under moksa as a means therefor.
	It
is, under that circumstance, not an external good to be procured but
a development of life ; and the zenith of such development is moksa
	So what remains is the supreme puruşārtha and that is mokṣa,
itself.
which can be indifferently translated as liberation, salvation or per-
fection depending on the metaphysical predilection of the exposition.
	(3) In connection with moksa, there are about four conceptions.
It may be looked upon as an extension of earthy life and maximiza-
tion of hedonistic values unmixed with suffering and pain, such a
mixture being the law in the life we know. The Indian tradition
outgrew this conception and categorized it as svarga, a state lower
than moksa. It too is transitory and trivial and consists in having
external goods and not the making of the self into what it should be
in itself. This critical attitude to the hedonistic verson of moksa re-
minds us of the consistent and repeated rejection by Jesus of a coarse
and earthly interpretation of the Kingdom of God. Popular religion
finds it hard to transcend the conception. The second interpretation
of the idea of moksa is what early Buddhism seems to have offered.
Its concept of nirvāņa easily lends itself to a nihilistic interpretation.
According to Buddhism, the basic error of life leading inevitably to
suffering is the belief in a hard and enduring ego and all the conse-
quent clingings to life. With the renunciation of this illusion one
achieves the dissolution of the ego and the resulting peace that
'passeth understanding'. The view is a straight antithesis to the
hedonistic concept of ideal life. The third interpretation of moksa
favoured prominently by Jainism and Sänkhya-Yoga is that it consists
in self-recovery. The self in man has entangled itself in matter and
this captivity in matter, real or imaginary, has brought about the
manifold ills of life. Escape or emancipation from the disabling
association is salvation called appropriately kaivalya. The fourth
conception of moksa is what we find in the Upanisads, the Gitā, the
Brahma-sūtra and all the schools of Vedanta. It defines moksa as the
attainment of Brahman, Brahma-prāpti or integration of the indivi-
dual with the supreme Spirit. There are alternative ways of
describing this goal. That will concern us later. The essential point
	$
to note at this stage is that while kaivalya is an ego-centric view of
moksa, this is a theo-centric understanding of the ideal. All schools
of Vedanta regard this as life eternal and life abundant, in and
through the realization of Brahman. Viśistādvaita subscribes to this
fourth conception of moksa, with its own specific clarifications.
	(4) Consistent with its metaphysical fundamentals, Visista-
dvaita interprets God-attainment or integration with Brahman not
as a dissolution of the individuality, or rather the illusion of indivi-
duality, in the integral totality that Brahman is, but as a contem-
plative experience or better still, a vision of Brahman. The essence
of bondage is the unawareness of God and the ascent to that aware-
ness by way of immediate apprehension is the supreme consummation
of life. In this state, the individual as individual is not obliterated
but recovers and fulfills his authentic individuality. The innate
differentia of the soul is the power to know, and this excellence
reaches its completion of exercise in the knowing of Brahman, the
infinite real. The finite self comes to possess itself, as it were, when
it experiences, in the fullest sense of experiencing, the all-commanding
reality of realities. The apparent dualism of the situation, the
individual subject experiencing the absolute subject as an object must be
cleared. There are two circumstances that mitigate the dualism.
The soul contemplating God achieves likeness to its object in respect
of purity, knowledge and bliss. This is hinted in several scriptural
texts, such as the Mundaka and the Gitā. This likeness is not total,
for the cosmic powers of God or His power of Grace to save souls are
not attained by the individual even in the state of self-perfection.1
There is kinship without total equation in perfection.
	Further.
this likeness is itself a gift of God, and Rāmānuja says that the
recognition of this state attained by the jīva, must make him adore
God all the more for this incomprehensible bountifulness.<sup>2</sup> In other
words, there is likeness, which does not take away the metaphysical
eminence of the Paramātman. The addition of powers to the jiva is
valued by him because they make him capable of a less inadequate
appreciation of God. There is another fundamental fact about this
experiential attainment of God. The individual has a vision of God
resplendent in all His attributes and glories. It is an inclusive
perceptual cognition. In that unified vision he sees himself also as
an integral constituent in the glory of God.<sup>1</sup> In his awareness of
himself he finds added the all-important dimension of his being an
inseparable part or body of God. So the object includes the subject
in the unitive experience, and the subject discovers itself as lodged in
the totality of the life-imparting God-head. There is no bifurcation of
subject and object, though the individuality of the percipient and the
eminence of the perceived are fully maintained. This unique
unification is achieved through the inclusion of the individual in the
expanse of the being of God.
	(5) A further characteristic of this experience must receive
attention. In the Chāndogya, we are told that there is no joy in the
experience of the finite, and that only the experience of the infinite
is joy. The Taittiriya and Bṛhadāraṇyaka are emphatic that Brahman
is of the nature of joy, meaning that to contemplate on it is to attain
bliss, ānanda. This is a cardinal doctrine of the Upanisads. The right
word for an experience of an object from which joy springs up is
'prīti' or love. Rāmānuja insists that the anubhava of Brahman
inevitably emerges as prīti.
	(6) The implication of this characterization of the unitive
vision as priti is to be seen. The state of love adds to the life of the
percipient immeasurably. But he wants that his life must not be
looked upon as an end in itself. It should serve the object of love
and must enhance its glory. The reality of love is measured not by
how much the subject appropriates the object, but by how much it
seeks to be appropriated by the object. This self-submission for the
appropriation by God is the essential nature of the experience of this
love. It is not a passive state of satiation but a dynamic and
restless eagerness to do the work of God, whatever may be the indivi-
dual's worth and whatever may be the self-sufficiency of the Divine
	This active manifestation of love in service is what is
beloved.
called by Rāmānuja kainkarya, seva or šeşa-bhāva. This is a further
dimension of the unitive experience. We have already seen that
ŝeşatva is an important connotation of ŝarīra. Rāmānuja defines this
sesatva or subsidiary character as "being of value only by virtue of
contribution to the principal entity."<sup>2</sup> In this ultimate experience
that character comes to fruition, and the individual soul in question
fulfils itself in joyful service or joyful eagerness for the service of its
lord and master. It prays for competence to render worthy service,
and God, in His infinite love, values, in spite of His metaphysical
self-sufficiency, the love that issues in the service, whatever be its
quantitative aspect.<sup>1</sup> God's valuation of the creatures' love towards
Him is unspeakably great. Rāmānuja makes these observations
about love, both that which is towards and that from God in his
commentary on the Gitā.<sup>2</sup>
	The entire nature of moksa is presented in the Saranāgati-gadya in
a long compound word :
	परिपूर्णानवरतनित्यविशदतमानन्यप्रयोजनानवधिकातिशयप्रियभगवदनुभवजनितान-
वधिकातिशयप्रीतिकारिता शेषावस्थोचिता शेषशेषतैकरतिरूपनित्यर्कैकर्य .........।
	(7) Thus far we have concerned ourselves with the inner
experiential content of moksa. There are two incidental questions.
When does the state of moksa start to be? Does it have an end or
termination? To the first question, Rāmānuja answers'that mokṣa in
its full reality arises when the soul passes beyond its present embodi-
ment, brought about by its karma. But still an anticipatory foretaste
of it is possible even before.<sup>8</sup> This conclusion is urged because
bondage is a fact and its termination should be awaited for the
initiation of the fuller life. If bondage were purely an illusion, the
actual enlightenment about the truth of things must mark the
beginning of the higher state.
	In Advaita a complication is introduced in the concept of jivan-
mukti, regarded as liberation 'even when one is still embodied'.
	If
bondage is an illusion, the liberation from it must be full liberation.
Why add the prefix '<i>jivat</i>', as if the bodily existence has to await
an end other than the ending of the illusion? There are different
interpretations of the jivan-mukti concept in the varied schools of
Advaita. Rāmānuja argues that the concept of jivan-mukti is incon-
sistent with the theory of the falsity of the embodied condition.4 In
Visistadvaita, it is maintained that the earthly life of the embodied
soul may contain seeds of moksa, in its spiritual experience, which
almost amounts to moksa, For such an experience, Vedanta Deśika
actually prays in his Dayāšataka.<sup>1</sup> A further idea is there in this
school that the intensity of the longing for moksa in a prapanna deter-
mines the duration of its postponement.  If it is of the utmost degree
in a prapanna, immediate liberation takes place. Anyway, moksa
arises as and when the impediments are annihilated. The impedi-
ments are avidyā, karma, vāsanā, ruci and prakṛti-sambandha.
	(8) Now, we have seen that moksa is the ending of all ills, the
release of the natural abundance of the individual soul and its
rapturous union with the Supreme by way of apprehension, love and
service. Its beginnings are there undoubtedly in mundane life and
its full magnitude is attained after the complete cessation of impedi-
ments. Now the problem is: how can this state of perfect life attained
in time be eternal? What happens in time must be subject to eventual
termination. There are three points of answer to this question.
Release consists of the removal of hindrances that keep in suppression
the innate nature of the soul, that is pressing for manifestation.
	It
is not an artificial product of circumstances, with whose disap-
	Nature freed from obstructions can very
pearance it may terminate.
well be perpetual and ever lasting, though its liberation into mani-
festation takes place in time. What is generated may be perishable,
but what is freed from obscuration, even though existing allthrough,
is not bound to pass out of existence for that reason. Secondly,
what is attained may be lost, if the subject ceases to be interested in
it, and moves out to another value. Such a contingency is impossible
in the present situation, for, a soul awakened into the fullness of its
understanding and freed from all binding factors, cannot but cling to
	such being the nature of that supremely blissful state.
mokşa,
Ignoring and deviation from the highest good can take place only in
a spiritually darkened soul. As for God, He, whose grace is the
ultimate means of release, whose compassion and love are eternal
to Him, whose love for devotees is beyond all measure and to whom
the liberated soul is precious beyond words and of infinite value,
cannot abandon him who has reached Him. Such a self-stultification
is impossible for the Divinity. It is with this assertion of the eternity
of mokşa that the Srī-bhāşya concludes.

CHAPTER V

SADHANA

	(1) In this fifth and final section of our study of Viśişţādvaita,
we are to sketch the theory of <i>hita</i> or sādhana propounded in the
school. It is to be expected that it is determined greatly by the con-
ception of reality, tattva and the ideal of life posited as the highest
puruşārtha. The system makes a distinction between two factors in
sādhana. One is what is already existing, an accomplished fact, as
the ontological resource to be operated in the process of achievement.
This is rightly called siddhopāya. The siddhopāya in man's progress to
perfection is God Himself, with His perfections such as infinite know-
ledge, infinite power and infinite compassion. No human effort
could even start, and for that matter, no man or world could even
be, without this foundational reality. That effort could effectuate
fruition is also due to the divine maintenance of the law of causation.
That in the moral sphere there is a reign of justice, so that deed
determines destiny, is also an expression of the basic spiritual power
making for conservation of values. Therefore this resource-reality,
siddhopāya, must be admitted of necessity, and that reality is God in
His plenitude.
	But this, though fundamental, operates through the co-operation
of the moral agent by way of appropriate effort. If the siddhopäya
were not merely necessary and fundamental but also sufficient to
actualize the summum bonum, in view of the eternal compassion of
God and His omniscience and infinite potency, there would have been
no bondage at all. Man's perfection would be an eternally realized
fact. Further, a perfection that is established without the indivi-
dual's aspiration and endeavour for it would not be perfection of a
living spirit, but that of a finished material tool, which just receives
passively its perfection and does not build it up through its own
initiative. Hence another factor in the body of the means or upāya
must also be admitted, and that is human effort, called appropriately
sādhyopāya. It is true that siddhopāya makes sādhyopāya possible, but
without the latter's supplementation, there is no completeness of
sādhana. When the sādhyopāya is completed, it is also true that
siddhopaya is drawn by it and fulfils the object of the sadhana.
	In
other words, when human effort reaches its zenith of performance, it
is the responsive and consequent grace or <i>prasāda</i> of God that crowns
the aspirant's life with the perfection aspired after. So both at the
beginning and the end, siddhopāya dominates and in the interval
sādhyopāya works. It is necessary absolutely, but definitely supple-
mentary or accessory.
	(2) The nature of the sādhyopāya, human endeavour, must be
clearly determined. As we have seen, bondage or samsāra is a fact,
however contingent and liable to termination it may be. Its essence
is the unawareness of God, avidyā with regard to the supreme reality
and all the consequences of that failure. To eliminate this, what is
required is the knowledge, rather the vision, of God. The Upanişads
declare that God cannot be gained except by His own self-revelation.
He has to choose to reveal Himself. He has to be invoked to that
effect. That seems to be the ultimate point of human effort.
	The
nature of the invocation is utmost love, love that spurns all other
ends and hungers and thirsts for the experience of the Divine with
the utmost intensity of longing that the human soul is capable of.
God reveals Himself to those to whom He is the life of their lives,
the soul of their souls, and who without union with Him pass, as it
were, into nothingness. Infinite compassion there may be eternally
in Him, but self-revelation to the love-less souls pursuing other ends,
is no compassion and does not constitute a purusartha. Hence the
condition to be fulfilled on the part of man to gain the experiential
presence of God is bhakti.
	(3) By bhakti is meant a form of knowledge, for ultimately love
is just knowledge of what is a source of joy to the knower. This is
not the knowledge of the scriptures. That knowledge,
	however
necessary, is lower. It is not the knowledge gained through divine
self-revelation. That would constitute the very end pursued, the
phala itself. Bhakti must be an intermediate type, rising beyond and
on the basis of scriptural revelation, but striving after the final
perceptual experience. So it is properly called meditation. It is a
conscious and willed practice of upāsana or dhyāna, intense concen-
tration characterized by intense love. When the Upanisads say that
only jñāna liberates, they signify this exercise of intelligence by way
of perpetual, ever-growing and imaginatively vivid meditation on
God with utmost love towards the object and therefore towards the
meditation itself. So bhakti, in short, is living meditation on God.
The maturation of it in point of magnitude and of depth brings
about the saving illumination.
	(4) This height or depth of bhakti presupposes another element
of knowledge. This knowledge may be called self-knowledge. A
self seeks values in accordance with what it understands itself to be.
If it understands itself to be a physical organism, it seeks material-
istic values.
	If it understands itself to be a self-subsistent entity, it
seeks non-involvement with alien factors. If it understands itself to
be a spirit and a spirit whose being is hitched to God and that in
Him lies its final life consummation, it cannot but seek the ecstasy
of union with Him. Hence as a pre-condition of seeking God by way
of bhakti, there must be authentic self-intuition and utmost certainty
with regard to what constitutes the self's perfection.
	This intuitive
self-understanding is to be achieved thorough a contemplative process
which the Gitā calls jñāna-yoga.
	(5) Now the Gita and the rest of spiritual literature maintain
that contemplativeness is prevented, thwarted and suppressed by the
psycho-physical conditions generated by rajas and tamas. Unless they
are subdued and finally eliminated, the tranquil pursuit of steady-
mindedness is out of the question. To put down these antagonistic
tendencies, which are all too powerful for the normal man, the Gitā
prescribes karma-yoga. Karma, as such, may itself be action enginee-
red by these tendencies themselves. But karma-yoga as defined and
developed in the Gita works as an infallible remedy against the
hindrances to contemplativeness. The essence of karma-yoga is to
discard concern for the personal and ego-centric fruits to the agent
and to work devotedly with the sole interest in the action as such.
With the ripening of karma-yoga there is a steady and progressive
purification of the psychic system furnishing thus the right matrix for
jñāna-yoga.
	In the elucidation of karma-yoga, Rāmānuja following the
Gitā insists on a three-fold renunciation and consecration of action,
ritualistic, religious and secular in its totality. There
	must
be the fixed ascription of all action to God as its real agent and no
egoistic agency must be claimed. The action as such must be re-
garded as God's own and not something to the individual. The
fruits of action, whatever they be, must be dedicated to God in their
entirety. That He alone is the doer, and that of works which wholly
are His, and for ends solely accruing to Him, must be the basic deter-
mination (vyavasāya) transmuting mere karma into a yoga. When
this state of consecration is consumated, the individual is set free
from all that inhibits spiritual contemplativeness.
	Rāmānuja takes
care to add that the restraints prescribed in religious literature, sama,
dama, uparati, tîtikşā and samādhāna, not merely co-exist with karma-
yoga but also enter into the dispositional substance of karma-yoga.
There is no conflict between karma-yoga and the prescribed ethical
restraints. They function in fusion. When karma-yoga reaches its
fulness, the inner element of spiritual attitude in it predominates over
its external manifestation in the form of exertion. So karma-yaga is
dominated by the inner element of jñāna and fulfils itself in preparing
the required ground for jñāna-yoga.
	(6) The entire plan of sādhana, from karma-yoga, through jñāna-
yoga, to bhakti-yoga, presupposes a solid comprehension of spiritual
truth through a devoted study of sacred revelation and connected
philosophical reflection. It goes without saying that this acquisition
of knowledge needs its own ethics and the informing spirit of bhakti,
for reaching the requisite level of excellence.
	(7) It remains now for us to attempt understanding another
factor in sādhana, which is held fundamental in Visišiştādvaita.
is the element of <i>prapatti</i> or <i>saranāgati</i>, which may be translated as
surrender or taking to God for refuge. We have seen that <i>bhakti</i> is
the ultimate element, the final phase of human effort, sādhyopāya, for
occasioning the descent of redemptive grace that is to crown the aspi-
rant with the accomplishment of his purpose in sādhana. It may so
happen that an individual examines himself and finds himself unable
even to start the arduous journey of sādhana, owing to the impediments
in his nature. This is all too well-known a predicament in which a
sādhaka may find himself. In such a situation, prapatti is held out
as a remedy and he is promised the removal of impediments and the
required competence to start his pilgrimage.
	Prapatti in this case originates bhakti. There is a second type of
situation in the practice of <i>bhakti</i> which may also require the remedial
complement of prapatti. A sādhaka may have advanced considerably
in the pathway of <i>bhakti</i> and find that his sādhana is deficient and that
the <i>bhakti</i> he has built up is definitely incomplete for the efficatious
culmination of his sādhana. Then prapatti is prescribed as a comple-
ting compliment which sets aside the consequences of the deficiencies
and renders the <i>bhakti</i> accepted as a full sādhana and brings about the
	がら
fruition inall its completion. These two are cases which subsume
prapatti under bhakti as an accessory to it, and this prapatti is rightly
named angaprapatti. It may be remarked that all traditions of bhakti
do admit this element of <i>prapatti</i> in some way or other in their pro-
gramme of <i>bhakti</i>.
	(8) Rāmānuja propounds another type of <i>prapatti</i> in his devotio-
nal works, and the tradition elaborates it a great deal. This is called
svatantra-prapatti. When the sā dhaka is utterly incapable of launching
himself on the pathway of <i>bhakti</i>, even with the supplementation of
prapatti, he can resort to prapatti, itself wholly. He, by his surrender.
appropriates the siddhopāya itself in the place bhakti. What his uncer-
tain capability by way of <i>bhakti</i> could not accomplish for him is
sought to be gained through the resources abounding in God as His
attributes. This is but right, for God, to whose care he consigns his
spiritual destiny, is an all-sufficient and unfailing means, provided one
does not restrict the divine operation by partial trust in it and by
utilizing other means also side by side. When the surrender is abso-
lute, God takes the situation wholly in His hands, as it were, and
releases His redemptive grace in unimpeded abundance. This
doctrine of <i>prapatti</i> is special to the tradition. Vedanta Desika
compares it to 'simhi-stanya'.<sup>1</sup>
	The qualifications for <i>prapatti</i> are stipulated. If one does not
have the knowledge required for <i>bhakti</i>, or does not have the practi-
cal ability to engage in it, or if his yearning for the goal has reached
the breaking point and he cannot wait for the progressive maturation
of bhakti or if his equipment or station in life is such that he cannot
fulfil the conditions of <i>bhakti</i> laid down in the <i>šāstras</i>, he can resort
to this autonomous <i>prapatti</i>. It may be he comes under all or
some or one of these categories of sādhakas and thus the very incom-
petence for <i>bhakti</i> seems to endow him, as it were, with competence
for <i>prapatti</i>. What is a disability in relation to the other sādhanas is
a strength for adoption of <i>prapatti</i>.
	While this conversion of weakness into strength in the alchemy
of prapatti is to be noted, it is not itself left vague and indefinite. The
principal factor in it and accessory factors are specified clearly and
the picture of <i>prapatti</i> receives definitiveness.
	The accessory factors are five.
	Ānukūlyasya-samkalpa: The person who resorts to God in
	(a)
this way must resolve to be in conformity to the divine will and
strive to co-operate in all that God designs. This includes the entire
kingdom of souls that are objects of God's compassion and the pra-
panna must make his love cover the entire universe.
	(b) Prātikūlyasya-varjana : Rejection of everything contrary
thereto.
	The full awareness of utter helplessness and
	(c) Akincanya :
total poverty of means to achieve the goal.
	(d) Mahāvišvāsa : Immense faith in the power and goodness of
God to save.
	(e) Goptriva-varanam : Prayer to God that He may take up the
role of the Saviour.
	Aided by these accessory factors, the devotee must place his
spiritual responsibility and burden in God's hands. This is transfer
of responsibility, called bhara-samarpaņa or bhara-nyāsa or ātma-nikṣepa.
This factor is the core or the principal element in prapatti.
	A single
act of total surrender in this fashion is enough for the purpose. The
jiva has to will his will away at the feet of the Lord. It is a giving up
of responsibility and giving it up to God. It is a negative-positive process.
Individual effort is terminated so that divine effort may replace it.
Trustful passivity succeeds surrender. The sādhaka becomes free from
burden and anxiety, and passes into the exhilaration of triumph.
	(9) Such is the outline of the plan of sādhana according to
Viśişţādvata. It is worthwhile recognizing its pervading characteri-
stic. At every stage and in the total scheme also the spirit and pro-
cedure consist of a synthesis of two elements, both of them held essen-
tial and in the unified arrangement one of them is subordinate and
accessory to the other. The Principle of 'synthesis and subordination'
seems to govern the conception of tattva and puruşārtha also.
	(i) The absolute Spirit is the fundamental reality and the
cosmos of finite existence is inseparably united with it in an adjecti-
val capacity.
	In the knowledge-situation the subject and predicate are
	(ii)
ultimate and the predicate is united with the subject as its chara-
cterization. There is a difference, unification and the subordination
of the viseşana or prakāra to the viseşya or prakārin.
	In the state of moksa, which consists of the union of the
	(iii)
individual self with the supreme Self, the finite self enjoys the ecstasy
of subservience to its Lord by way of kainkarya.
	(iv) The two ultimate factors in sādhana are the grace of God
and human effort, and both of them are necessary and function in
unison. Between them human effort is accessory to the operation
of grace.
	(v)
	In karma-yoga, there is the dedication of works to God, and
in the process we have both the inner element of understanding,
jñāna, and the outer expression in action. Between the two, action
is the body and the jñāna-factor is the soul of the full karma-yoga.
	(vi) In the jñāna yoga, there is self-knowledge and also the
knowledge of the self as just the sesa or subsidiary to God. Between
the two, self-knowledge and knowledge of God, the first is preparatory
and contributory to the second. God-knowledge is the inclusive
and principal concern.
	(vii) There is no separation between jñäna and upāsanā-as often
supposed-and jñāna is a contributory factor to the mode of approach
constitutive of upāsanā. Upāsanā is jñāna elevated to the level of the
practice of meditation.
	Between upāsanā and bhakti, mere upāsanā is no good, even
	(viii)
if it were possible, and it reaches its culmination in the ceaseless and
absorbing love of God.
	In bhakti as such, love is the predominant factor and as
	(ix)
supplementary to it the element of surrender or <i>prapatti</i> enters.
There is unification without any confusion between the whole and
its constituent.
	In propatti there is cessation of human initiative, but as a
	(x)
preparation for passing on the initiative entirely to the divine. The
negative factor is duly subordinate to the positive aspect of submissi-
on of initiative to God, for Him to take it up and expand with His
abundance to the requisite efficacy.
	(10) In regard to <i>propatti</i>, we have already noted, weakness,
such as want of knowledge, of power of action, of spiritual patience
and of other qualifications specified in the sāstra, is held up as the
exact fitness for adopting it as the saving technique. It seems to be
a constructive utilization of disability itself. Hence it is open to uni-
	It is a boon to the spiritual have-nots. But a
versal adoption.
remarkable consequence follows. Being a pathway for the lower as-
pirant, it may be presumed that it is itself lower. Such is not the
valuation of <i>prapatti</i>. Since the mangement and mastery of the pro-
cess of liberation belong wholly to the absolute and supreme power
in the situation and its efficacy flows from the abundance of His
nature, and not from the paltry resources of the finite recipient of
grace, this is the greater and higher way.
	What is executed by the superior agent, in the present case the
supreme Agent, is bound to be better, surpassingly better executed.
The substitution of the initiative of God for that of man through
the initiative of man himself to that effect, will render the work of
redemption perfect, even as its Author is.
	In the later ages of Srīvaiṣņavism it is remarkable how the rela-
tive roles of the divine initiative and the human invocation of grace
get clarified. The Tengalais seize one fundamental truth that the com-
passion of God is a primordial reality, not arising out of any cause in-
clusive of prapatti. It is truly nirhetuka, and Yāmunācārya had this
in mind when he described God as nisargasuhrt. But this eternal
compassion, dayā, has to transform itself into prasāda to effectuate
man's emancipation. This Yāmuna called āśritavātsalyatvam.
	This
we may describe as consequent grace.
	Rāmānuja appropriates both
the terms "dayā" and "prasāda" with all their due implications in
his <i>saraņāgati-gadya</i>. The consequent phase of divine initiative flows
from the primordial dayā undoubtedly, but takes the specific direction
of operation in response to the opening occasioned by man's prapatti.
Prapatti, therefore, is the vyāja for prasāda. This aspect of the truth
is brought out splendidly in the Vadagalai explanation. Thus we have
the primordial compassion and consequent grace, and the transforma-
tion of the first to the second is facilitated by the intervening, indis-
pensable but accessory, circumstance of man's total and supreme
surrender.
	From the religious point of view, the Viśişţādvaita of Rāmānuja
is Vaişņavism. Its traditional name is Śrī-vaişņavism.
	There is a
special significance in the prefix. Sri or Laksmi is the Mother-goddess
sharing the divinity of her Lord, Nārāyaņa, and functions eternally
and pervasively with Him. The functions of cosmic sovereignty,
redemptive compassion and the acceptance of the kainkarya of the
released souls are common to both the Deities and in reality they
constitute a single principle. Srī has a distinctive role of Her own,
in addition; and she pleads the cause of creatures before Nārāyana and
	Q.
prevails upon Him to exercise prasāda. In Her case, the law of mercy
wholly supersedes that of justice. The tradition names its inclusive
God-head, Srīman-Nārāyaņa. Between them, Nārāyaņa is
	the
substantive, and Sri is adjectival, translating His compassion to
actuality. This status of Srī is supported on the authority of the
authentic Vedic hyms, Rāmāyaņa, Viṣņu-purāņa, the Pāñcarātra-āgama
and the religious poetry of the Alvārs. Yāmuna, Rāmānuja, Kureša,
Parāsara Bhatta and Vedānta Dešika have sung of the glories of
Sri in their sublime hymns.
	Among the three sacred 'secrets',
(rahasya-traya), the middle one, called dvaya, explicitly embodies the
surrender to and adoration of Sri as preparatory to and as also
constituting a part of the devotion to S'rīman-Nārāyaņa. Rāmānuja's
rendering of the mantra is "Srīman-Nārāyaņa, ašaraņya-saraņya,
ananya-saranah, tvat-pādāravindayugalam saranamaham prapadye".
	It is appropriate that we conclude with Rāmānuja's message
of <i>prapatti</i> in his own words:
	ं खाद्यीन तिविघचेतनाचेतनसरूपस्थितिपवृत्तिमेदम्, क्षेशकर्माद्यशेषदोषासंस्पृष्टम्,
- आभाविकानवधिकातिज्ञयज्ञानबलैम्बर्यवीर्यशक्तितेजःप्रभृत्यसंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणौघमहार्ण
वम् परमपुरुषं भगवन्तं नारायणं खामित्वेन सुद्दत्वेन गुरुत्वेन च परिगृह्य, ऐकान्ति-
कात्यन्तिक तत्पादाम्बुजद्वय परिचर्येकमनोरथ:, तत्पाप्तये च तत्पादाम्बुजद्वय प्रपत्ते-
रन्यन्नमे कल्पकोटि सहस्रेणापि साधनमस्तीति मन्वान: तस्यैव भगवतो नारायणस्य अखिल-
सत्त्वदयैकसागरस्य, अनालोचित गुणागुणाखण्डजनानुकूलामर्यादशीलवत:, खामाविकान-
वधिकातिशयगुणवत्तया देवतिर्यव्यनुष्याद्यखिलजनद्ददयानन्दनस्य, आश्रितवात्सल्यैक-
जलवे:, भक्तजनसंरलेषैकभोगस्य, नित्यज्ञानक्रियैश्वर्यादिभोगसामग्रीसमृद्धस्य महाविभूते:,
श्रीमतम्बरणारविन्दयुगलमनन्यात्मसंजीवनेन तद्गतसर्वभावेन शरणमनुव्रजेत्।"
