book : भक्तिसूत्रम्

अथातो भक्तिं व्याख्यास्यामः॥१॥

1. Now, therefore, we shall expound Bhakti1. 

सा त्वस्मिन् परमप्रेमरूपा॥२॥

2. It is of the nature of the highest love for This One2.

अमृतस्वरूपा च॥३॥

3. And of the nature of immortal bliss1. 

यल्लब्ध्वा पुमान् सिद्धो भवति, अमृतो भवति, तृप्तो भवति॥४॥

4. On attaining which, a man becomes perfect, immortal, satisfied for ever.

यत्प्राप्य न किंचिद्वाञ्छति, न शोचति न द्वेष्टि, रमते, नोत्साही भवति॥५॥

5. On gaining which one wants nothing, laments over nothing, hates nothing, delights in nothing, and is never enthusiastic over anything earthly. 

यज्ज्ञात्वा मत्तो भवति, स्तब्धो भवति, आत्मारामो भवति॥६॥

6. Experiencing which one becomes exhilarated beyond self-control, stands perfectly still, and revels in the Self2. 

सा न कामयमाना निरोधरूपत्वात्॥७॥

7. It is no worldly desire, for it is of the nature of suppression1.

निरोधस्तु लोकवेदव्यापारन्यासः॥८॥

8. Suppression means abandoning all worldly and Vedic activities2. 

तस्मिन्ननन्यता तद्विरोधिषूदासीनता च॥९॥

9. And exclusive devotion to Him and indifference to all things that are obstacles to it. 

अन्याश्रयाणां त्यागोऽनन्यता॥१०॥

10. 'Exclusive devotion' is abandonment of all other supports1. 

लोकवेदेषु तदनुकूलाचरणं तद्विरोधिषूदासीनता॥११॥

11. Indifference to obstacles consists in undertaking only such activities– whether of ordinary life or those enjoined in the Vedas –as are favourable to it2. 

भवतु निश्चयदार्ढ्यादूर्ध्वं शास्त्ररक्षणम्॥१२॥

12. Even after firm establishment in divine resolve, the Scriptures are to be respected1. 

अन्यथा पातित्यशङ्क्या॥१३॥

13. Otherwise there is apprehension of a fall.

लोकोऽपि तावदेव, भोजनादिव्यापारस्त्वा शरीरधारणावधि॥१४॥

14. Even ordinary life is only up till then, though physical activities such as taking food, continue as long as one wears this body. 

तल्लक्षणानि वाच्यन्ते नानामतभेदात्॥१५॥

15. Definitions of this Bhakti will now be stated in accordance with different views. 

पूजादिष्वनुराग इति पाराशर्यः॥१६॥

16. ‘It is love of worship and other similar acts’–says Vyasa, the son of Parasara.

कथादिष्विति गर्गः॥१७॥

17. ‘Fondness for spiritual conversation and the like’,–says Garga. 

आत्मरत्यविरोधेनेति शाण्डिल्यः॥१८॥

18. ‘These are Bhakti in so far as they do not clash with the contemplation of the Self’–says Sandilya. 

नारदस्तु तदर्पिताखिलाचारता तद्विस्मरणे परमव्याकुलतेति॥१९॥

19. But Narada says “It is the offering of all acts to Him and feeling the highest pang of separation on occasions of losing remembrance of him1. 

अस्त्येवमेवम्॥२०॥ 

20. So it is, so it is. 

यथा व्रजगोपिकानाम्॥२१॥

21. As, for instance, in the case of the cowherdesses of Vraja (Gokula). 

न तत्रापि माहात्म्यज्ञानविस्मृत्यपवादः॥२२॥

22. It cannot be said that even there, is a blemish, the absence of recognition of divine glory. 

तद्विहीनं जाराणामिव॥२३॥

23. Lacking in such appreciation is the love, for instance, of adulterers. 

नास्त्येव तस्मिंस्तत्सुखसुखित्वम्॥२४॥

24. In that sort of love, there is no idea at all of one's feeling happy in the happiness of the other1. 

सा तु कर्मज्ञानयोगेभ्योऽप्यधिकतरा॥२५॥

25. Now this Bhakti is greater than Kama (performance of religious works), Jnana (knowledge) and Yoga (mystic control of the mind)1. 

फलरूपत्वात्॥२६॥

26. For it is of the nature of the fruit of all these. 

ईश्वरस्याप्यभिमानद्वेषित्वाद्दैन्यप्रियत्वात्॥२७॥

27. And because God hates egotism and loves humility2. 

तस्या ज्ञानमेव साधनमित्येके॥२૮॥

28. Some think that knowledge is the one means to it. 

अन्योन्याश्रयत्वमित्यन्ये॥२९॥

29. Others are of opinion that there is mutual dependence between the two.

स्वयंफलरूपतेति ब्रह्मकुमारः॥३०॥

30. It is its own fruit, sayeth Narada, the son of Brahma. 

राजगृहभोजनादिषु तथैव दृष्टत्वात्॥३१॥

31. For it is seen to be just so in the case of the palace, a dinner, and the like. 

न तेन राजपरितोषः क्षुच्छान्तिर्वा॥३२॥

32. The King is not pleased by that knowledge, nor is hunger appeased by mere knowledge of food1. 

तस्मात् सैव परिग्राह्या मुमुक्षुभिः॥३३॥

33. Hence this Bhakti alone should be chosen by those who seek liberation. 

तस्याः साधनानि गायन्त्याचार्याः३४॥

34. Teachers have recommended various means to this Bhakti1.

तत्तु विषयत्यागात्सङ्गत्यागाच्च॥३५॥

35. It results from the renunciation of the objects of the senses and renunciation of attachment2. 

अव्यावृत्तभजनात्॥३६॥

36. From unremitting adoration. 

लोकेऽपि भगवद्गुणश्रवणकीर्तनात्॥३७॥

37. From listening to narration of various blessed qualities of the Lord and proclaiming them aloud even while attending to affairs of ordinary life3. 

मुख्यतस्तु महत्कृपयैव भगवत्कृपालेशाद्वा॥३૮॥

38. In the main, however, it results through the grace of the great ones, through even a little of the grace of the Lord1. 

महत्सङ्गस्तु दुर्लभोऽगम्योऽमोघश्च॥३९॥

39. Now, association with the great, is hard to get, difficult to realise, though most invaluable. 

लभ्यतेऽपि तत्कृपयैव॥४०॥

40. Nevertheless, it is attainable, and that through His grace only. 

तस्मिंस्तज्जने भेदाभावात्॥४१॥

41. For there is no distinction between Him and His devotees2.

तदेव साध्यताम्, तदेव साध्यताम्॥४२॥

42. That alone should be sought out, that alone should be sought out.

दुःसङ्गः सर्वथैव त्याज्यः॥४३॥

43. Evil association should be shunned by all manner of means1. 

कामक्रोधमोहस्मृतिभ्रंशबुद्धिनाशसर्वनाशकारणत्वात्॥४४॥

44. For it is the cause of desire, anger, delusion, loss of memory, loss of intellect and utter ruin2. 

तरङ्गायिता अपीमे सङ्गात्समुद्रायन्ति॥४५॥

45. These are in themselves like little waves, but through association become a veritable sea. 

कस्तरति कस्तरति मायाम्? यस्सङ्गांस्त्यजति, यो महानुभावं सेवते, यो निर्ममो भवति॥४६॥

46. Who crosses, who crosses this Maya1 (illusory glamour of the world)? He who gives up attachments, he who waits upon a spiritually magnanimous soul, he who becomes free from the idea of possession. 

यो विविक्तस्थानं सेवते, यो लोकबन्धमुन्मूलयति, निस्त्रैगुण्यो भवति, यो योगक्षेमं त्यजति॥४७॥

47. He who habitually resorts to a solitary place2, he who cuts asunder all worldly bondage, he who transcends the three funda-
mental Gunas of nature1, he who gives up the idea of acquisition and preservation.

यः कर्मफलं त्यजति, कर्माणि संन्यसति, ततो निर्द्वंद्वो भवति॥૪૮॥

48. He who gives up all desire for the fruit of his actions, renounces all activities and thus passes beyond all pairs of opposites. 

वेदानपि संन्यसति, केवलमविच्छिन्नानुरागं लभते॥४९॥

49. He who renounces even the Vedas, who has only incessant love for the Lord3. 

स तरति स तरति स लोकांस्तारयति॥५०॥

50. He crosses, he crosses this Maya, and he takes other people also across it. 

अनिर्वचनीयं प्रेमस्वरूपम्॥५१॥

51. The nature of Love is inexpressible in words1. 

मूकास्वादनवत्॥५२॥

52. It is like a dainty dish tasted by a mute person. 

प्रकाशते क्वापि पात्रे॥५३॥

53. It finds expression very rarely in some worthy soul. 

गुणरहितं कामनारहितं प्रतिक्षणवर्धमानमविच्छिन्नं सूक्ष्मतरमनुभवरूपम्॥५४॥

54. Beyond the fundamental Gunas, above all desires, growing intense moment 

तत्प्राप्य तदेवावलोकयति, तदेव शृणोति, तदेव भाषयति, तदेव चिन्तयति॥५५॥

55. When one has reached it, one sees that alone, hears about that alone, talks of that alone, thinks of that alone1. 

गौणी त्रिधा गुणभेदादार्तादिभेदाद्वा॥५६॥

56. Secondary Bhakti is of three kinds, to be classified either according to the difference of Gunas, or according to the difference of the afflicted and other aspirants to whom it belongs. 

उत्तरस्मादुत्तरस्मात्पूर्वपूर्वा श्रेयाय भवति॥५७॥

57. In either case each preceding one is more conducive to beatitude than the one succeeding it2.

अन्यस्मात्सौलभ्यं भक्तौ॥५८॥

58. Bhakti is easier1 than any other way of approach to God. 

प्रमाणान्तरस्यानपेक्षत्वात् स्वयंप्रमाणत्वात्॥५९॥

59. For it needs no external proof, being its own proof. 

शान्तिरूपात् परमानन्दरूपाच्च॥६०॥

60. And because it is of the nature of peace and of the nature of perfect bliss. 

लोकाहानौ चिन्ता न कार्या निवेदितात्मलोकवेदत्वात्॥६१॥

61. One need not worry if one's affairs go wrong, for the self, worldly affairs and 
even the Vedas have been surrendered to the Lord1. 

न तदसिद्धौ लोकव्यवहारो हेयः किन्तु फलत्यागस्तत्साधनं च कार्यमेव॥६२॥

62. So long as this Bhakti is not achieved, the ordinary way of life should not be given up, but renunciation of the desire for reward of actions and discipline preparatory to it, should be persistently practised2. 

स्त्रीधननास्तिकचरित्रं न श्रवणीयम्॥६३॥

63. Accounts of women, wealth and of unbelievers should not be listened to.

अभिमानदम्भादिकं त्याज्यम्॥६४॥

64. Pride, vanity and other vices should be eschewed. 

तदर्पिताखिलाचारः सन् कामक्रोधाभिमानादिकं तस्मिन्नेव करणीयम्॥६५॥

65. All acts should be offered up to Him and even feelings like desire and pride should be entertained with reference to Him only1. 

त्रिरूपभङ्गपूर्वकं नित्यदास्यनित्यकान्ताभजनात्मकं प्रेमकार्यं प्रेमैव कार्यम्॥६६॥

66. The three-dimensional form of love should be destroyed, and love and love alone should be entertained-devoted love of the eternal servant and of the eternal wife2. 

भक्ता एकान्तिनो मुख्याः॥६७॥

67. Bhaktas exclusively attached to the Lord are the best of His devotees. 

कण्ठावरोधरोमाञ्चाश्रुभिः परस्परं लपमानाः पावयन्ति कुलानि पृथिवीं च॥६८॥

68. Talking of Bhakti to one another in faltering tones attended with thrill and tears of joy, they sanctify their race and the wide earth. 

तीर्थीकुर्वन्ति तीर्थानि सुकर्मीकुर्वन्ति कर्माणि सच्छास्त्रीकुर्वन्ति शास्त्राणि॥६९॥

69. They turn ordinary bathing places into sacred places of purification. ordinary acts into pious deeds, and words of instruction into holy texts. 

तन्मयाः॥७०॥

70. They are full of Him1. 

मोदन्ते पितरो नृत्यन्ति देवताः सनाथाचेयं भूर्भवति॥७१॥

71. The Pitris (manes) are delighted in them, the gods dance with joy, and this earth is happy in their care.

नास्ति तेषु जातिविद्यारूपकुलधनक्रियादिभेदः॥७२॥

72. Among them there is no distinction due to birth, education, colour, race, wealth, occupation and the like1.

यतस्तदीयाः॥७३॥

73. For they are all His own.

वादो नावलम्ब्यः॥७४॥

74. The aspirant should not take to disputation. 

बाहुल्यावकाशत्वादनियतत्वात्॥७५॥

75. For it leads to endless arguments and leads to no certain conclusion.

भक्तिशास्त्राणि मननीयानि तदुद्बोधककर्माणि करणीयानि॥७६॥

76. Works on Bhakti should be studied and acts calculated to rouse this Bhakti should be performed2. 

सुखदुःखेच्छालाभादित्यक्ते काले प्रतीक्ष्यमाणे क्षणार्धमपि व्यर्थं न नेयम्॥७७॥

77. Time free from the sway of pleasure, pain, desire, profit or other worldly considerations, is what every one seeks; so even half a second should not be trifled away1. 

अहिंसासत्यशौचदद्यास्तिक्यादिचरित्राणि पालनीयानि॥७८॥

78. Non-violence, truthfulness, purity, compassion, piety and other essentials of good life, should be maintained. 

सर्वथा सर्वभावेन निश्चिन्तैर्भगवानेव भजनीयः॥७९॥

79. Free from all care, ye shall always adore Bhagavan (the Lord) alone with all your heart and soul2.

सङ्कीर्त्यमानः शीघ्रमेवाविर्भवत्यनुभावयति भक्तान्॥८०॥

80. If steadily praised, the Lord reveals Himself soon and blesses the Bhaktas with realisation1.

त्रिसत्यस्य भक्तिरेव गरीयसी, भक्तिरेव गरीयसी॥८१॥

81. For all the three divisions of time past, present and future-Bhakti alone is preferable to other paths, Bhakti alone is preferable.

गुणमाहात्म्यासक्ति-रूपासक्ति-पूजासक्ति-स्मरणासक्ति-दास्यासक्ति-सख्यासक्ति-वात्सल्यासक्ति-कान्त्यासक्त्यात्मनिवेदनासक्ति-तन्मयतासक्ति-परमविरहासक्ति-रूपैकधाप्येकादशधा भवति॥૮२॥

82. Though in itself one, this Bhakti manifests itself in eleven different forms: (I) attachment to the glorification of the blessed qualities of God, (2) attachment to His beautiful form, (3) attachment to His 
worship, (4) attachment to His remembrance, (5) attachment to His service, (6) attachment to His friendship, (7) attachment to filial love for Him, (8) attachment to wifelike love for Him, (9) attachment to self-surrender, (10) attachment to being filled with Him, and (11) attachment to an intense feeling of excruciating pain of separation from Him1. 

इत्येवं वदन्ति जनजल्पनिर्भया एकमताः कुमारव्यासशुकशाण्डिल्यगर्गविष्णुकौण्डिन्य-शेषोद्धवारुणिबलिहनुमद्विभीषणादयो भक्त्याचार्याः॥८३॥

83. So declare the teachers of Bhakti with one accord in defiance of public criticism, teachers like, (1) Sanatkumara, (2) Vyasa, (3) Suka, (4) Sandilya, (5) Garga, (6) Visnu, (7) Kaundinya, (8) Sesha, (9) Uddhava. (10) Aruni (11) Bali, (12) Hanuman, and (13) Vibhishana1. 

य इह नारदप्रोक्तं शिवानुशासनं विश्वसिति श्रद्धत्ते भक्तिमान् भवति, स प्रेष्टं लभते स प्रेष्टं लभत इति॥८४॥

84. Whoeven in this world believes and has faith in this gracious instruction offered by Narada, he becomes endowed with Bhakti, he attains the highest beatitude, aye, he attains the highest beatitude2.